I&apos;D LIKE TO CALL THE
TUESDAY MARCH TWENTY SECOND
TWENTY TWENTY TWO MEETING
OF THE INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY
POLICE OVERSIGHT COMMISSION TO
ORDER MISOGYNOUS.
&gt;&gt; WOULD YOU DO THE ROLL CALL
PLEASE?
YES.
THANK COMMISSIONER VELLA
PRESENT COMMISSIONERSHIP
COUNCIL MEMBER RAMLAH HERE THE
COUNCIL MEMBER THORNELL COUNCIL
COMMISSIONER WALTER SATURDAY
CHAIR JACKSON PRESENT
COMMISSIONER CARDERS TODAY MY
APARTMENT FOR THE VICE SHE AND
HER VERY PRESENT COMMISSIONER
RAY MILBOURNE RATHER TODAY
COMMISSIONER HARRIS, THE
PRESENT COMMISSIONER MY
THOUGHT.
ALL RIGHT.
WE HAVE A QUORUM.
ARE THERE ANY ADDITIONS TO OR
CHANGES TO THE AGENDA OR IS
THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE IT AS
IS SO MOVED THE ALL IN FAVOR
OF APPROVING THE AGENDA?
&gt;&gt; I ANY OPPOSED THANK YOU.
THE CHIEF DID EVERYBODY GET A
CHANCE TO SEE THE FEBRUARY
MEETING MINUTES WHICH WERE SENT
AS AN ATTACHMENT?
IF SO, ARE THERE ANY ADDITIONS
CORRECTIONS CHANGES TO THE
FEBRUARY MEETING IN ITS OR IN
MOTION TO APPROVE THE MESSAGE
ONE TO ONE CHANGE IN ORDER
WITHIN THE SEVEN OR FIVE SHOULD
BE SIX OR FIVE ACTIVE.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK ANY OTHER ADDITIONS OR
CORRECTIONS
?
&gt;&gt; IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
THE FEBRUARY MINUTES AS
CORRECTED MOTION IS OUR SECOND
SECOND ALL IN FAVOR?
I OPPOSED.
ALL RIGHT.
NOW WE&apos;VE COME TO THE TIME FOR
A PUBLIC FORUM MISOGYNOUS.
&gt;&gt; ARE THERE ANY CALLERS
COMMISSIONER CARTER
THAT HELLO
EVERYONE.
I&apos;M JUST OBVIOUSLY CANNOT
ATTEND THE MEETING.
I&apos;M OUT HERE IN NEVADA AND I
WISH YOU ALL WELL.
&gt;&gt; I JUST WANTED TO LISTEN IN
AND SEE WHAT WAS GOING TODAY.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
WE ARE GOING TO TALK ABOUT
TRAFFIC TRANSPARENCY.
IF YOU ARE AROUND FOR THAT YOU
MAY BE PARTICULARLY INTERESTED.
THANK YOU FOR LOGGING IN.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; ANYONE ELSE.
&gt;&gt; OK, SO WE AS A GUEST TODAY
LIEUTENANT COLONEL MICHAEL
KRUMM FROM THE PROFESSIONAL
DEVELOPMENT BUREAU FOR THE
MICHIGAN STATE POLICE IS GOING
TO ZOOM IN WITH US TODAY AND
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THEIR
TRAFFIC STOP DATA REPORT WITH
WHICH EVERYONE IS FAMILIAR AND
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT, YOU
KNOW, WHY WHY THEY THOUGHT IT
WAS IMPORTANT TO DO AND WHAT
THEY THOUGHT IT IS HOW THEY
FEEL IT&apos;S GOING FOR THE
MICHIGAN STATE POLICE.
&gt;&gt; SOME OF US HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO TALK WITH THE
STATISTICIAN WHO WHO DESIGNED
AND DID MOST OF THE STUDY NEXT
WEEK.
BUT WE&apos;RE REALLY HAPPY TO HEAR
FROM LIEUTENANT COLONEL CRUM TO
TALK ABOUT THE REPORT FROM THE
PERSPECTIVE OF THE MICHIGAN
STATE POLICE.
WELCOME.
GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU, DR. JACKSON.
IT&apos;S GOOD TO SEE EVERYBODY AND
THANKS FOR HAVING ME BE A ZOOM
ON BEHALF OF COLONEL GASPAR.
HE IS IN AN AIRPLANE RIGHT NOW
AND I HAVE SPENT THE ENTIRE DAY
HERE IN IRAQ.
SO THIS PLATFORM MAKES IT VERY
GOOD FOR US TO GET TOGETHER
THIS EVENING TO DISCUSS THIS.
AS DR. JACKSON INDICATED THAT
IT SOUNDS LIKE YOU&apos;RE WELL
AWARE OF THE TRAFFIC STOP STUDY
THAT WAS DONE BY MICHIGAN STATE
UNIVERSITY SPECIFICALLY
BAKHTAWAR WITHIN THE SCHOOL
OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE.
WHAT HAPPENED WITH THAT STUDY
AND I&apos;LL GIVE YOU A QUICK
SUMMARY.
I&apos;LL GIVE YOU A QUICK HISTORY
THEN I&apos;LL TALK A BIT ABOUT OUR
AGENCY&apos;S RESPONSE.
&gt;&gt; WELL, BASICALLY WE FOUND IS
THAT WE ASKED MICHIGAN STATE TO
DO A STUDY BASED ON SOME DATA
THAT WE HAD OBTAINED THROUGH
OUR VARIOUS NETWORKS WITHIN THE
AGENCY SPECIFICALLY RELATED TO
TRAFFIC STOPS AND SPECIFIC EVEN
MORE SPECIFICALLY RELATED TO
THE THE RACE AND OR ETHNIC
BACKGROUND OF THE MEMBERS
OF THE COMMUNITIES THAT WE WERE
STOPPING.
WHAT WE FOUND IN THAT STUDY IN
WHAT DR. WOLFE REPORTED IS THAT
THERE WERE RACIAL AND ETHNIC
DISPARITIES IN THE FREQUENCY
AND OUTCOME OF TRAFFIC STOPS
CONDUCTED BY OUR TROOPERS IN
2020 THAT HAD A ADVERSE IMPACT
ON CERTAIN COMMUNITIES WITHOUT
GOING THROUGH THE ENTIRE STUDY
OR GETTING INTO ALL THE FINE
DETAILS.
IF DR. WOLFIE&apos;S COMMUNITY
CERTAINLY A PERSON TO ANSWER
THOSE QUESTIONS BUT BASICALLY
WE FOUND THAT ACROSS MICHIGAN
MOST OF OUR DISTRICTS WE HAVE
SEVEN DISTRICTS IN THE STATE
THAT WE HAD AFRICAN-AMERICANS
WERE SIGNIFICANTLY MORE LIKELY
TO BE INVOLVED IN A TRAFFIC
STOP THAN WOULD BE EXPECTED
BASED ON A REPRESENTATION IN
THAT PARTICULAR POPULATION
THERE ALSO THE REPORT ALSO
SHOWED THAT HISPANIC AND ASIAN
DRIVERS WERE ON THE CONTRARY
LESS LIKELY TO BE STOPPED THAN
WOULD BE EXPECTED BASED ON
THEIR REPRESENTATIVE
REPRESENTATION IN THE
POPULATION, AFRICAN-AMERICAN
DRIVERS AND ALSO HISPANIC
DRIVERS ARE ALSO MORE LIKELY
THAN WHITE DRIVERS TO BE
SEARCHED OR ARRESTED AFTER A
TRAFFIC STOP.
AND CONVERSELY, ASIAN DRIVERS
ARE SIGNIFICANTLY LESS LIKELY
TO BE SEARCHED AND ARRESTED
COMPARED TO WHITE DRIVERS.
BUT THEY WERE MORE LIKELY TO
RECEIVE A CITATION IN THOSE
INCIDENTS.
WHAT I THINK IS IMPORTANT FOR
THE PANEL IS TO KIND
OF UNDERSTAND A LITTLE BIT
OF THE BACKGROUND HISTORY WE
HAD IN THE STATE.
POLICE HAVE LITERALLY TRACKED
OUR TRAFFIC STOP DATA FOR MANY,
MANY YEARS.
IT WASN&apos;T UNTIL 2017 WHERE WE
STARTED COLLECTING THE ACTUAL
RACE OF OUR DRIVERS.
WE BEGAN PUBLICIZING OUR DATA.
WE BEGAN THAT IN TWENTY
EIGHTEEN AND REALLY TRIED TO BE
MORE TRANSPARENT WITH THE
PUBLIC WE SERVE.
IN FACT WE ACTUALLY CREATED AN
ENTIRE DIVISION TO HANDLE
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY
ISSUES WITHIN THE PUBLIC TO
GIVE THE CONFIDENCE WITHIN OUR
AGENCY A BIG CHANGE THAT REALLY
KIND OF SOLIDIFIED THIS IS THAT
WE STARTED COLLECTING MANDATED
DATA ON THE RACE DRIVERS IN A
TRAFFIC CRASH INSTEAD.
&gt;&gt; AND LET ME GIVE YOU A SOME
POINTS AS TO WHY THIS IS SO
IMPORTANT.
IT WOULD BE ALL TOO EASY TO
TAKE THE TRAFFIC THAT BAD OF A
TROOPER AND COMPARE IT TO THE
GENERAL POPULATION.
BUT WHEN YOU TALK TO THE
RESEARCHERS THAT IS NOT A GOOD
BENCHMARK AND SO WE LOOKED AT
SEVERAL BENCHMARKS TO USE AND
ONE OF THEM BEING WHO ARE THE
LIKELY DRIVERS IN ANY GIVEN
AREA?
AND ONE OF THE GOOD INDICATORS
THAT RESEARCH INDICATES IS THIS
TRAFFIC CRASH REPORT, THE
THEORY BEING THAT MOST PEOPLE
THAT ARE ON THE ROADS, WHETHER
THEY BE YOU KNOW, WHATEVER
BACKGROUND THEY COME FROM,
THEY&apos;RE EXHIBITING A CERTAIN
NUMBER OF TRAFFIC CRASHES THAT
SHOULD BE CONSISTENT WITH THE
SAME NUMBER OF DRIVERS THAT WE
WOULD EXPECT TO SEE IN ANY
GIVEN AREA.
AND SO USING THOSE BENCHMARKS
AS OPPOSED TO JUST CENSUS DATA
,MSU IS ABLE TO COME UP AND
COMPILED THIS REPORT.
YOU ALSO USE THE VEIL
OF DARKNESS BENCHMARK.
THEY ALSO LOOKED AT OUR SECURED
CITY PARTNERSHIPS FOR THOSE
THAT DO NOT KNOW THE MICHIGAN
STATE POLICE IS ACTIVELY
ENGAGED IN LAW ENFORCEMENT
SERVICES WITHIN SEVERAL
COMMUNITIES ACROSS THE STATE
THAT ARE PRIMARILY HIGHER CRIME
AREAS THAT WE&apos;VE BEEN WORKING
IN THOSE CITIES FOR OVER SEVEN
YEARS NOW AND TRYING TO ADDRESS
THOSE ISSUES.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I THINK
IS IMPORTANT IS IS YOU KNOW IS
WHY DID WE DO THIS?
NUMBER ONE, WHEN WE COME ACROSS
DATA LIKE THIS, WE WANT TO
UNDERSTAND IT BETTER.
WE WANT TO UNDERSTAND WHAT ARE
THE CAUSES, WHAT WHAT ARE WE
FACING AND WHAT ARE WHAT ARE
OUR OFFICERS SEEING?
&gt;&gt; WE ALSO WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THIS GETS OUT BECAUSE IN
OUR AGENCY WE ABSOLUTELY FEEL
THAT THIS SHOULD BE A STANDARD
WITHIN OUR INDUSTRY AND THAT
WITH THE DATA THAT WE NOW HAVE
AVAILABLE TO US THAT WE HAVE A
RESPONSIBLE REPORT THAT DATA
AND SOME OF THE THINGS THAT AS
AN AGENCY WE HAVE DECIDED IS WE
PUT IN PLACE A FIVE POINT PLAN
TO REALLY ADDRESS THIS ISSUE
BUT MORE NOT ALSO TO TO
UNDERSTAND THE ISSUE.
SO WHEN DR. WOLFE COMES IN IF
HE COMES INTO ONE OF YOUR
MEETINGS IN THE FUTURE, HE WILL
BE ABLE TO TELL YOU THE
LIMITATIONS OF SOME OF THE DATA
,SOME OF THE THINGS THAT ARE
DIFFICULT TO TO TRACK SOCIO
ECONOMIC ISSUES, A TRAFFIC
VOLUME ISSUES AS FAR AS A
SEASONAL CHANGES.
YOU KNOW, FOR ONE THING, JUST
TO KIND OF GIVE YOU AN EXAMPLE
,YOU MAY HAVE A LARGE NUMBER
OF PARK DRIVERS DOWN IN DETROIT
BEING STOPPED ON THE METRO
FREEWAYS.
&gt;&gt; WELL, IF THAT IS THE CASE A
LOT OF TIMES YOU MIGHT SEE A
SKEWED NUMBER BASED ON THE FACT
THAT THAT MAY BE COMMUTERS
COMING IN AND OUT OF THE CITY.
IT MAY NOT GIVE YOU AN ACCURATE
REPRESENTATION.
SO THERE IS A LOT OF VARIABLES
THAT THE RESEARCHERS TRY TO
WITH ACCOUNT FOR AS WE MOVE
FORWARD INTO OUR NEXT STEPS AND
I&apos;LL TALK ABOUT THAT LATER.
BUT WE&apos;RE TRYING TO REALLY MAKE
THAT DATA BETTER TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE HAVE A FULL
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT WE&apos;RE
ACTUALLY GOING THROUGH OUT
THERE WITH OUR TROOPERS ON THE
ROADS.
SO OUR FIVE POINT RESPONSE PLAN
TO THIS IS NUMBER ONE, THE
FIRST THING WE DO IS WE HAVE
WE&apos;RE ALMOST FINISHED WITH THE
HIRING OF AN INDEPENDENT EXPERT
AND POLICY AND PROGRAM REVIEW.
WE ARE LOOKING FOR A PERSON
THAT HAS A EDUCATIONAL
BACKGROUND ALONG WITH A LAW
ENFORCEMENT BACKGROUND THAT
UNDERSTANDS BOTH COMPONENTS
OF RESEARCH AND THE COMPONENTS
OF POLICY AND THE COMPONENTS
OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AND WHAT OUR
INTENT IS TO GIVE FULL ACCESS
TO THIS PERSON OR GROUP AND
ALLOW THEM TO REVIEW EVERYTHING
THAT WE DO WITHIN THE AGENCY
FROM EVERYTHING FROM OUR
TRAINING POLICIES TO THE TYPE
OF VIDEOS THAT WE SHOW TO THE
WAY THAT WE MANAGE OUR DATA AND
THEN MAKE RECOMMENDATIONS BASED
OFF OF THAT.
THE SECOND THING WE&apos;VE DONE IS
WE REALLY WANT TO ENGAGE THE
COMMUNITY SO WE HAVE PURPOSELY
SET OUT TO NOT ONLY SPEAK WITH
OUR DEPARTMENT MEMBERS.
IN FACT RIGHT NOW COLONEL
GASPAR IS MAKING MANY ROUNDS
WITH THE LEADERSHIP TEAM TO
ADDRESS THESE CONCERNS THE
TROOPERS TO BRING THEM UP TO
SPEED ON WHAT WE&apos;VE SEEN AND
WHY AND DISCUSS WHY THIS IS
IMPORTANT BUT ALSO REACHING OUT
TO THOSE IMPACTED COMMUNITIES
AND AND ENGAGING OUR COMMUNITY
MEMBERS.
AND WE HAVE PRIMARILY DONE THAT
THROUGH THE USE OF OUR BLUE
ADVISORY PANEL.
FOR THOSE OF YOU THAT DON&apos;T
KNOW, THE MICHIGAN STATE POLICE
HAS A CIVILIAN ADVISORY BOARD
MADE UP OF CITIZENS FROM ACROSS
STATE.
THEY COUNSEL US AS A LEADERSHIP
TEAM ON THINGS THAT WE MAY NOT
SEE.
THEY LOOK FOR BLINDSPOTS, ASK
QUESTIONS.
THEY THEY LOOK INTO THINGS
WE&apos;RE CONSIDERING SUCH AS BODY
CAMERA DEPLOYMENT, OTHER POLICY
ISSUES, THINGS AROUND LAW
ENFORCEMENT.
AND SO WE&apos;VE ASKED THIS
ADVISORY PANEL TO REACH INTO
THEIR COMMUNITIES AS WELL TO
HELP SET THESE MEETINGS TO
BRING THE COMMUNITIES TOGETHER
AND AND HAVE PURPOSEFUL
DISCUSSION ON WHAT THIS DATA
ACTUALLY MEANS.
THE THIRD THING WE&apos;VE DONE IS
WE&apos;VE CREATED A DASHBOARD AND
THIS IS JUST ABOUT FINALIZED.
BUT ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
THOUGHT IS THAT OUR TROOPERS
TRULY DON&apos;T KNOW WHERE THEY
STAND AND IN RELATED INVADING
TO THE THE RATIOS OF THE STOPS
THEY&apos;RE MAKING, THEY HAVE NO
AWARENESS OF THIS.
AND SO ONE OF THE ONE OF THE
THEMES WE&apos;VE KIND OF GRABBED ON
TO IS THIS FAIRNESS THROUGH
AWARENESS.
WE WANT OUR MEMBERS TO BE FULLY
ENGAGED, FULLY INFORMED ON WHAT
THEIR DATA SAYS IN RELATION TO
THE AREA STATE PATROL AND
THROUGH THAT DASHBOARD THEY
WILL HAVE THE ACCESS TO DO
THAT.
WE&apos;RE INCREASING OUR EDUCATION
OPPORTUNITIES AS DR. JACKSON
INDICATED, I AM THE COMMANDER
OF THE PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
BUREAU.
MY BUREAU IS RESPONSIBLE FOR
ALL TRAINING DEVELOPMENT
OF EVERY ONE OF OUR MEMBERS,
WHETHER IT BE OUR ENFORCEMENT
SIDE OR OUR CIVILIANS SIDE.
AND REALLY WHAT WE&apos;RE LOOKING
AT IS TO CONTINUE THOSE
CULTURAL EDUCATIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES CONTINUING THE
PROFESSIONAL TRAINING, THAT
DE-ESCALATION TRAINING,
ANYTHING THAT WE CAN DO TO
ENHANCE AND MAKE OUR MEMBERSHIP
BETTER INFORM BADGER, EDUCATE
AND HOPEFULLY MAKE BETTER
DECISIONS AND THEIR IN THEIR
WORK.
AND THEN FINALLY THE DEPLOYMENT
OF BODY CAMERAS NOW WE HAVE
ADVOCATED FOR THE USE OF THE
BODY CAMERAS FOR LONG A LONG
TIME IT&apos;S LARGELY BEEN A A
FINANCIAL ISSUE THAT IS KIND
OF RESTRAINED US FROM GETTING
THAT DONE.
BUT WE THIS GOES ALONG WITH
THAT ACCOUNTABILITY STUFF IN
THAT THAT PIECE THAT WE WANT TO
ASSURE THE PUBLIC THAT WE SERVE
AND THE TROOPERS THAT ARE OUT
SERVING THE PUBLIC ARE
ACCOUNTABLE.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
THINK REALLY ISN&apos;T NECESSARY TO
HAVE THAT BODY CAMERA TO GIVE
YOU AN IDEA WHERE WE&apos;RE AT
RIGHT NOW WE HAVE ABOUT FOUR
HUNDRED AND SIXTY BODY CAMERAS
DEPLOYED IN THE STATE.
IT&apos;S A LARGE UNDERTAKING WHEN
YOU&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT ALMOST TWO
THOUSAND UNIFORMED MEMBERS,
PROBABLY ABOUT YOU KNOW.
FOURTEEN HUNDRED OF THOSE ARE
PEOPLE THAT WILL GET A BODY
CAMERA BUT THEY&apos;RE THE POLICE
SERGEANTS, THE TROOPERS
OF MOORCROFT OFFICERS ARE STATE
PROPERTY SECURITY OFFICERS THAT
WILL BE ISSUED THOSE AND WE&apos;RE
ABOUT JUST UNDER A THIRD OF THE
WAY FROM BEING DONE WITH THAT
GROUP.
&gt;&gt; THE NEXT STEPS THAT WE THAT
WE WANT TO MOVE FORWARD IN THIS
KIND OF LOOSE.
WHAT I TALKED A LITTLE BIT
EARLIER IS WE WANT TO BETTER
UNDERSTAND OUR DATA BECAUSE
THIS WAS THE FIRST RUN OF THIS
BECAUSE DR. YOU KNOW THIS THERE
WERE SOME THINGS IN THIS
RESEARCH REPORT THAT WERE
DIFFICULT FOR US TO UNDERSTAND
.
WE HAVE ASKED TO HAVE A REVIEW
OF OUR TWENTY TWENTY ONE DEATH.
WE REALIZED NOT ONLY TWENTY
TWENTY WAS A UNIQUE YEAR WITH
THE PANDEMIC BUT LARGELY YOU
COULD SAY THE SAME THING FOR
TWENTY TWENTY ONE AND WE REALLY
SEE THIS GOING FORWARD AS A
LONG TERM PROJECT.
WE DON&apos;T WE DO NOT SEE US
STOPPING THIS AFTER NEXT YEAR
WE WILL PROBABLY CONTINUE ON
FOR DECADES ESPECIALLY AS OUR
DATA CAPABILITIES IMPROVE THE
QUALITY OF OUR DATA IMPROVES
AND WE REALLY WANT TO CONTINUE
WITH THIS STUDY.
WE WANT TO CONTINUE TO REFINE
OUR DASHBOARDS AT TROOPERS USE
AND THEN IN ANOTHER EIGHTEEN
MONTHS EIGHTEEN TO TWENTY FOUR
MONTHS DOWN THE ROAD WE WANT TO
HAVE A SECOND INDEPENDENT
REVIEW BY AN OUTSIDE AGENCY SO
THAT WE&apos;RE REACHING OUT FOR
OUTSIDE OVERSIGHT IF YOU WILL
AND NO RECOMMENDATIONS AS TO
HOW DO WE PROVE HOW DO WE
ENSURE THAT THE THE THE CITIZEN
CONTEXT WHERE WE&apos;RE PROVIDING
THE SERVICE WE&apos;RE PROVIDING IS
DONE AT THE HIGHEST LEVEL?
WE&apos;VE KIND OF MADE A COMMITMENT
WITHIN THE AGENCY, NUMBER ONE
THAT WE ARE GOING TO ELEVATE
OUR OWN STANDARDS AND HOPEFULLY
THE STANDARDS OF POLICING
PROFESSION THAT OUR TROOPERS
WILL BE BETTER EDUCATED IN
EXPANDING THE UNDERSTANDING,
THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE OUTCOMES
OF THE WORK THEY DO THAT THEY
THAT WE AS AN AGENCY LIKE I
SAID, SOME OF THOSE DATA JUST
CAME AVAILABLE TO US AFTER
TWENTY SEVENTEEN BUT EVEN IN
TWENTY SEVENTEEN EIGHTEEN OR
NINETEEN IT WAS NOT WE WOULD
CONSIDER GOOD DATA.
THERE ARE A LOT OF GLITCHES
WITHIN OUR COLLECTION OF THE
DATA.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF THINGS THAT WE
HAD TO WORK ON IN THE
BACKGROUND.
WE WANT TO CONTINUE TO EXECUTE
THAT AND MAKE DATA FORM
POLICING DECISIONS CONTINUE TO
EXPLORE OPPORTUNITIES FOR
GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT WITHIN
OUR MEMBERS AND THEN ENGAGE IN
CONTINUAL CONVERSATIONS AND
LISTENING SESSIONS.
AND THAT&apos;S REALLY WHY YOU KNOW,
WHEN I PRESENTED THIS AT THE
COMMISSION I KNOW DR JACKSON
WAS THERE AND I KNOW SHE HAD
SPOKEN ALSO TO COLONEL GASPAR.
I THOUGHT IT&apos;S IMPORTANT THAT
WE GET THIS INFORMATION OUT
THAT WE DISCUSS IT OPENLY
BECAUSE I THINK IT IS SOMETHING
THAT ALL LAW ENFORCEMENT NEEDS
TO BE CONSCIOUS OF .
SO DR JACKSON, THAT IS A VERY
HIGH LEVEL VERY QUICK
PRESENTATION.
I DON&apos;T KNOW IF THERE&apos;S ANY
SPECIFIC QUESTIONS I CAN TRY TO
ANSWER ALSO, BUT I WANT TO AT
LEAST GET A CHANCE TO TALK
ABOUT THE WHY AS TO WHY THE
STATE POLICE ENGAGED IN THIS
SOME OF WHAT OUR RESULTS ARE
AND WHAT SOME OF OUR FUTURE
STEPS WILL BE.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
WE APPRECIATE THAT.
DO THAT DOES ANYBODY HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS?
&gt;&gt; I HAVE ONE AND I DON&apos;T KNOW
IF THIS IS I IMAGINE YOU WERE
PROBABLY INVOLVED IN THIS
DECISION MAKING BECAUSE YOU
TALKED ABOUT IT IN A COUPLE
OF DIFFERENT WAYS.
YOU TALKED ABOUT GETTING AN
INDEPENDENT OUTSIDE REVIEW AND
I KNOW THAT YOU ALL USED
MICHIGAN STATE TO DO THAT.
YOU CERTAINLY HAD THE OPTION
OF PAYING A CONSULTING GROUP TO
DO THAT.
BUT I THINK ONE OF THE THINGS
WE FOUND IN ANN ARBOR IS THAT
YOU GET DIFFERENT KINDS
OF RESULTS WHEN YOU PAY SOMEONE
TO DO IT AS OPPOSED TO HAVING
AN OUTSIDE AND AN INDEPENDENT
GROUP OF RESEARCHERS AT A
RESEARCH INSTITUTION DO THAT.
CAN YOU TALK ANYTHING ABOUT
YOUR RATIONALE FOR GOING THAT
ROUTE?
&gt;&gt; YES.
WHERE WE PASSIVELY LOOKED AT
NUMBER ONE FOR THAT WAS A BIG
REASON FOR THAT.
BUT NUMBER TWO IS THEY ALSO HAD
A BACKGROUND IN DOING THIS.
THEY HAVE DONE SEVERAL SIMILAR
RESEARCH PROJECTS INVOLVING THE
BENCHMARKING OF TRAFFIC STOP
DATA AND THAT IS A UNIQUE I
WOULDN&apos;T SAY THIS IS UNIQUE
WITHIN LAW ENFORCEMENT.
WE ACTUALLY RECENTLY HIRED DR.
JULIE LIEBLER FROM MICHIGAN
STATE.
SHE WAS IN CHARGE OF THEIR
MASTER&apos;S PROGRAM IN CRIMINAL
JUSTICE.
THE ONLINE PROGRAM AND SHE YOU
KNOW, WE WERE VERY TOUCHED BY
REACHING OUT TO THEM TO HAVE
THAT THAT OPINION THAT
NON-VALUE BUT ALSO THE THE FACT
THAT WE WERE AWARE OF SOME
OF THE WORK THEY DID, IT MADE
IT A VERY GOOD FIT FOR US BEING
SO CLOSE TO THE AGENCY HERE IN
WASHINGTON.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER HOFFMAN HAS A
QUESTION FOR YOU.
THANK DIDN&apos;T FOR BRIEFING US ON
THIS STUDY.
YOU MENTIONED SOMETHING ABOUT
RACE.
IS IT IS IT UP TO THE
DISCRETION OF THE OFFICER TO
NOTICE THE RACE OF THE
INDIVIDUAL OR THERE IS A
QUESTION TO ASK THE INDIVIDUAL
WHICH RACE HE OR SHE BELONGS TO
YOU?
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S A GREAT QUESTION AND
WE DO NOT INQUIRE AS TO THE
RACE OF THE DRIVERS THAT IS
WITHIN OUR POLICY WE ASK OUR
TROOPERS TO MAKE THE BEST
ASSESSMENT REALIZING THAT IT
CAN BE VERY DIFFICULT AT TIMES
BECAUSE WE ARE SUCH A BLENDED
COMMUNITY AND SO WE&apos;VE DONE
SOME TRAINING TO HELP EXPLAIN
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN RACE AND
ETHNICITY AND ALSO TO HELP
UNDERSTAND DIFFERENT CULTURES.
BUT AT THE END OF THE DAY IT&apos;S
A JUDGMENT BY EACH INDIVIDUAL
TROOPER AS TO WHAT A WHAT THEY
PUT ON THOSE CITATIONS AND OR
TRAFFIC REPORTS.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
YOU KNOW THE DANFORD OPEN OPEN
POLICING PROJECT LOOKS AT LOTS
OF AGENCIES ACROSS THE COUNTRY
AND MICHIGAN STATE POLICE USED
TO RANK REALLY HIGH IN THIS
AREA OF NOT IDENTIFYING THE
RACE AND ETHNICITY OF DRIVERS
AND WE USED TO TALK ABOUT HOW
TROUBLING THAT WAS BECAUSE
THERE WERE SUCH A HIGH
PERCENTAGE OF THOSE UNKNOWN
PEOPLE CHECKING THE BOX
OF UNKNOWN AND WHAT WE&apos;VE SEEN
WHAT IS SO WAS IT IN TWENTY
SEVENTEEN THEN AS YOU GUYS
STARTED THINKING ABOUT
COLLECTING THIS DATA THAT YOU
STARTED MAKING A CONCERTED
EFFORT TO DO THAT DIFFERENTLY
BECAUSE PEOPLE HAVE NOTED THAT
DIFFERENCE IN THE LAST FEW
YEARS THAT THAT DATA THOSE DATA
POINTS ARE REALLY IMPROVING.
YES THAT IS WHEN WE WE
UNDERTOOK THAT AND YOU KNOW ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT WE&apos;D LOVE TO
SEE SOMEDAY WOULD BE THE
ABILITY TO THAT BE A
REQUIREMENT FOR THE DRIVER&apos;S
LICENSE DESIGN.
WE WOULD TAKE THE DISCRETION
OUT OF THE TROOPERS.
WE HAVE A DECISION I DON&apos;T WANT
TO GET INTO THAT DISCUSSION BUT
YOU KNOW, FOR RIGHT NOW, DR
JACKSON RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; 2017 IS WHEN WE STARTED THAT
BECAUSE WE FELT THE DATA AGAIN.
WE I DON&apos;T WANT TO GET INTO THE
LONG, SLOW PROCESS
OF TECHNOLOGY WITHIN STATE
GOVERNMENT BUT IT WAS ONE
OF THOSE THINGS WHERE WE WERE
ABLE TO GET A LOT OF THOSE
THINGS IN LINE AND GET THAT
MOVING WITH OUR VENDORS TO TO
CAPTURE ALL THE DATA WE NEEDED
TO CATCH AND WE THOUGHT WE
THOUGHT RACE IS OBVIOUSLY A
VERY IMPORTANT WELL, YOU KNOW,
I&apos;VE SAID THIS TO YOU BEFORE.
I REALLY APPRECIATE YOU ALL
SORT OF TAKING THE LEAD ON
THAT.
IT MAKES IT EASIER FOR
MUNICIPALITIES LIKE OURS TO DO
THAT KIND OF WORK.
I KNOW I APPRECIATE CERTAINLY
THEIR FRANKNESS WITH WHICH YOU
AND COLONEL GASPARE HAVE TALKED
ABOUT THE DATA GOOD, BAD OR
UGLY.
YOU&apos;VE BEEN WILLING TO GO OUT
AND TALK ABOUT IT IN MANY
DIFFERENT AREAS AND JUST USING
IT AS A STARTING POINT FOR
THINKING ABOUT HOW TO EDUCATE
AND TRAIN AND I AM CERTAINLY
GRATEFUL FOR THAT.
THAT EXAMPLE WE HERE HAVE BEEN
WORKING WITH EASTERN MICHIGAN
UNIVERSITY BECAUSE THEY HAVE
KIND OF A CRIMINAL JUSTICE
CENTER AS WELL AND THEY HAVE A
SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN CRIMINAL
JUSTICE POLICY RESEARCH PROJECT
AND WE&apos;VE BEEN WORKING WITH
THEM AND WE&apos;VE BEEN WRESTLING
WITH THE VEIL OF DARKNESS AND
TRAFFIC CRASHES AS A BENCHMARK
.
AND SCOTT WOLFE WILL BE COMING
TO TALK TO US I THINK NEXT
MONDAY AND KIND OF TALK ABOUT
THE WAYS HE USED THOSE MODELS
AS WE WRESTLE WITH THE MODELS
THAT WE&apos;LL USE HERE.
AND SO LIKE YOU ALL, I THINK
WE&apos;LL BE USING SEVERAL
DIFFERENT BENCHMARKS TO TRY TO
MAKE THE BEST SENSE OF THE DATA
WE HAVE.
BUT YOU KNOW, AS FAR AS
RESEARCHERS GO, ONE OF THE
THINGS WE ALWAYS THINK ABOUT IS
REPLICATION AND EXTENSION AND
SO HAVING RESEARCHERS DO THAT
KIND OF WORK IN A RIGOROUS WAY
MAKES A BIG DIFFERENCE FOR US
AND IT&apos;S SENSE IT SETS THE
STANDARD FOR US IN TERMS
OF WHAT WE NEED TO DO AS WELL.
AND SO WE CERTAINLY APPRECIATE
ALL OF THOSE THINGS AND I
APPRECIATE YOU ZOOMING IN WITH
US TODAY.
&gt;&gt; ANYBODY ELSE HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS?
ALL RIGHT.
WELL THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR ZOOMING
IN AND I GUESS I&apos;LL SEE YOU
NEXT MONTH.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU EVERYONE.
THANK YOU
.
ALL RIGHT.
SO CONTINUING IN THAT VEIN, WE
HAVE A TRAFFIC TRANSPARENCY
RESOLUTION AS YOU ALL PROBABLY
KNOW, THE HUMAN RIGHTS
COMMISSION WROTE A TRAFFIC
TRANSPAC AGENCY RESOLUTION IN
CONCERT WITH US.
WE ARE ALSO WORKING WITH THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AND
EACH COMMISSION HAS DIFFERENT
WHEREAS CLAUSES BECAUSE WE COME
AT THIS FROM DIFFERENT PLACES.
THE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION WAS
THINKING ABOUT IT IN TERMS
OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS OF PEOPLE
WHO ARE BEING STOPPED.
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
WAS THINKING ABOUT
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY ISSUES
AND CERTAINLY WE THINK ABOUT
POLICE OVERSIGHT HERE WHAT IS
SIMILAR OR IDENTICAL ACROSS THE
THREE COMMISSIONS ARE THE
RESOLVED CLAUSES.
SO WHAT WE&apos;RE ASKING COUNCIL TO
DO IS THE SAME AND THE REASON
WHY WE&apos;VE GONE THAT ROUTE IS
BECAUSE WE DON&apos;T WANT THE CITY
ATTORNEYS OR STAFFERS TO HAVE
TO DO A LOT OF WORK IN
RECONCILING THREE DIFFERENT
RESOLUTIONS.
SO WE HAD A RESOLUTION AT OUR
LAST MEETING.
DID IT EVER GO TO THE PRINTER?
WE&apos;RE JUST CHECKING TO SEE IF
IT&apos;S BEEN ABLE TO BE
DISTRIBUTED TO ALL ON PAPER.
WE&apos;RE HAVING A PROBLEM WITH THE
PRINTER IF NOT I CAN READ IT
AND WE CAN TALK ABOUT IF THERE
ARE ANY CHANGES YOU ALL WOULD
LIKE TO MAKE OR IF YOU&apos;D LIKE
TO TAKE A VOTE ON IT.
NO.
ALL RIGHT.
WELL, WE&apos;LL HAVE TO DO IT.
OLD SCHOOL IS THERE A WAY FOR
ME TO PROJECT IT?
&gt;&gt; MAYBE IF NOT, NO WORRIES.
DO YOU WANT TO SIGN IN AND I
WANT YOU DO I NEED A LINK TO
SAY OH OK, HOLD ON.
&gt;&gt; LET&apos;S SEE IF I CAN ACTUALLY
FIND THAT THING WOULD IT BE BUT
SO BE THOSE SCREENS.
I DON&apos;T KNOW IF THAT WOULD BE
ANY EASIER FOR ANYBODY TO SEE
ACTUALLY RIGHT.
PROBABLY NOT.
WE&apos;LL JUST WE&apos;LL JUST DO IT,
YOU KNOW THE DRAFT FROM THREE
FIVE OH YEAH.
&gt;&gt; OK, LOOK AT YOU ALL
TECHNOLOGY.
OK, GREAT THANK YOU.
I SAID YOU SAID THAT YOU SAW
THE DRAFT THERE MAY BE ONE
WHEREAS CLAUSE IT&apos;S NOT THERE
BECAUSE IT&apos;S TRACK CHANGES IN
MIND BUT YOU MAY HAVE THAT AS
WELL SO ONE TWO THREE FOUR FIVE
SIX SEVEN WHEREAS THERE ARE
CIVIL RIGHTS, TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY AND POLICING ISSUES.
DO YOU ALL HAVE THAT ONE?
IT&apos;S THE LAST WHEREAS CLASS NO
THAT ONE OUT THERE.
&gt;&gt; OK SO I READ THAT ONE OUT
LOUD.
IT&apos;S JUST KIND OF A SUMMARY.
IT WAS SUGGESTED TO US BY THE
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION THAT WE
KIND SUMMARIZE WHY WE&apos;RE ALL
DOING THIS SO WHEREAS THERE ARE
CIVIL RIGHTS TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY AND POLICING ISSUES,
THESE DATA ARE RELEVANT TO THE
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AND
TO THE INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY
POLICE OVERSIGHT COMMISSION.
SO THAT&apos;S ALL.
AND THEN THE RESOLVE CLAUSES
ARE THE SAME.
AND LET ME JUST MAKE SURE YOU
ALL HAVE
THERE WAS ANOTHER
SUGGESTION THAT I JUST WANT TO
SEE IF IT WAS ADDED
YOU ALL
HAVE THE SECOND TO LAST SORT
OF BULLET POINT THAT SAYS IT
WILL NOT REPORT THE NAME
ADDRESS, SOCIAL SECURITY
NUMBER, DRIVER&apos;S LICENSE, ET
CETERA.
EVERYBODY HAS THAT.
OK, HOW ABOUT IN THE SECOND TO
LAST RESOLVED CLAUSE?
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE YOU
ALL HAVE THIS RESOLVED.
THE INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY
POLICE OVERSIGHT COMMISSION
REQUEST THAT THE ANTARIA POLICE
DEPARTMENT REGULARLY
COLLABORATE WITH THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION TO ENSURE
NATIONALLY RECOGNIZED BEST
PRACTICES ARE IMPLEMENTED TO
MITIGATE BIAS AND DISPARITY IN
VEHICLE STOPS AND IN THE USE
OF EVOLVING TECHNOLOGIES THAT
MAY PERPETUATE RACIAL BIAS.
EVERYBODY HAS THAT ALREADY IN
EFFECT.
OK, SO ARE THERE ANY SUGGESTED
CHANGES ADDITIONS TO THIS
ATTRACTION&apos;S DELETIONS TO THIS
DRAFT VERSION
?
&gt;&gt; NO GIVING TIME FOR YOU ALL
TO SQUIRREL.
YEAH, I BELIEVE MISS JONES IS
GOING TO GET SOME COPIES RIGHT
NOW.
&gt;&gt; YES, SHE&apos;S GOING TO GET THE
PRINT VERSION BUT IT LOOKS LIKE
EVERYBODY&apos;S GOT A VERSION
ALREADY SO YOU&apos;RE GETTING A
QUICK QUESTION.
YES, SIR.
I REMEMBER FROM WHEN WE
DISCUSSED THIS A LITTLE BIT
LAST MONTH THAT ALL OF THESE
BULLETED POINTS UNDER THE
SECOND RESULT OF OR SO ARE
PIECES OF DATA THAT THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT CURRENTLY ALREADY
COLLECTS UNTIL IT&apos;S NOT LIKE
THERE IS A STRETCH FOR THEM TO
HAVE TO COLLECT OTHER
INFORMATION.
&gt;&gt; IS THAT CORRECT?
RIGHT.
SO THAT WAS A COMMENT THAT WE
GOT LAST MONTH AND IT TURNS OUT
THAT ALL OF THE BULLET POINTS
ARE DATA THAT ARE ALREADY BEING
COLLECTED.
&gt;&gt; SO THERE&apos;S NO NEW
TECHNOLOGY, THERE&apos;S NO NEW
TECHNOLOGY THAT THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT NEEDS TO IMPLEMENT.
&gt;&gt; THERE ARE NO THERE&apos;S NOTHING
NEW THAT THEY NEED TO ADD TO
THEIR SYSTEM OR ANYTHING LIKE
THAT.
SO THESE BULLET POINTS ARE ALL
THINGS THAT AND NOT ONLY ARE
THEY ALL THINGS ALREADY
COLLECT, THESE ARE ALL THINGS
THAT TO WHICH THEY&apos;VE TURNED
OVER THE DATA TO US ALREADY.
&gt;&gt; AND SO KIND OF LIKE WHAT
CURRENT LIEUTENANT COLONEL CRUM
WAS SAYING.
THESE ARE DATA WE&apos;VE ALREADY
GOTTEN.
WE JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE CONTINUE TO GET THEM EVERY
YEAR AND THAT BE THEY&apos;RE
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC.
&gt;&gt; SO IN THE FORM IN WHICH WE
HAVE THEM, THEY&apos;RE ANONYMIZED.
THERE&apos;S NO PEOPLE&apos;S NAMES OR
IDENTIFYING INFORMATION IN THEM
AND AND THAT&apos;S WHAT WE&apos;D LIKE
TO DO.
THERE WERE SOME I THINK
CONFLATION LAST TIME ABOUT
THERE NEEDING TO BE A POLICE
DASHBOARD, ET CETERA.
&gt;&gt; AND THAT&apos;S A SEPARATE ISSUE
IRRESPECTIVE OF POLICE
DASHBOARD.
&gt;&gt; WE WANT THESE DATA TURNED
OVER TO US EVERY YEAR JUST AS
THE MICHIGAN STATE POLICE ARE
TALKING ABOUT AND WE WANT THEM
TO BE PUBLIC.
WE SIT IN AN AREA RICH AND
RESEARCHERS WHO HAVE EXPERTIZE
IN PUBLIC POLICY AND
CRIMINOLOGY AND POLICING THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN HAS
SEVERAL NEW FACULTY MEMBERS WHO
HAVE BEEN RECENTLY QUOTED
NATIONALLY IN DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
POLICING PARTICULARLY IN
TRAFFIC STOPS AND FOR THEM AND
OTHERS TO AVAIL THEMSELVES
OF THESE KIND OF DATA CERTAINLY
ENHANCES OUR COMMUNITY BUT ADDS
TO THE DATA THAT ARE USEFUL ALL
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
AND SO, YOU KNOW, CERTAINLY
SELFISHLY I DON&apos;T WANT THE
STANFORD OPEN POLICING PROJECT
TO HAVE ANYTHING ON US BUT
THESE KINDS OF OF DATABASES ARE
VERY USEFUL FOR PEOPLE TO LOOK
AT TRENDS ACROSS THE COUNTRY
AND FOR US TO BE ABLE TO HAVE
DATA FROM TWENTY SEVENTEEN TO
TWENTY TWENTY ALREADY WILL BE
USEFUL AND WE ARE IN THE
PROCESS AS I MENTIONED BEFORE
OF ANALYZING THAT I KNOW SOME
OF YOU ARE INVOLVED IN THOSE
CONVERSATIONS WITH RESEARCHERS
AND FROM ACROSS THE STATE ABOUT
WHICH BENCHMARKS TO USE AND HOW
TO WHICH ANALYZES TO RUN AND I
THINK THE ANSWER HAS BEEN WE&apos;RE
JUST GOING TO RUN LOTS
OF ANALYTICS AND LOTS OF OF
DIFFERENT BENCHMARKS AND SEE
WHAT WE GET AND THEN HAVE
REALLY FRANK AND OPEN
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT THAT.
BUT WE WANT TO BE ABLE TO DO
THAT EVERY YEAR AND WE ALSO
WANT RESEARCHERS, OTHER
RESEARCHERS TO BE ABLE TO DO
THIS AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; WE THINK THAT, YOU KNOW,
THAT CONTRIBUTES TO
TRANSPARENCY AND THAT
ULTIMATELY THIS CERTAINLY
SPEAKS TO IMPROVING THE TRUST
IN THE POLICE DEPARTMENT WHEN
THEY&apos;RE WILLING TO OPENLY SHARE
INFORMATION AND TALK ABOUT THE
DATA POINTS WE UNDERSTAND THAT
THAT ALTHOUGH THOSE MAY BE
UNCOMFORTABLE CONVERSATIONS AND
THEY MAY NOT BE THEY MAY BE
LOVELY CONVERSATIONS THAT
WHETHER THEY ARE NOT THOSE
KINDS OF VERY FRANK AND OPEN
CONVERSATIONS ARE IMPORTANT TO
HAVE IN THE PUBLIC SPHERE TO AN
EARLIER POINT, HAVING
INDEPENDENT RESEARCHERS ANALYZE
DATA IS A VERY DIFFERENT
PROCESS THAN PAYING A
CONSULTING FIRM TO DO SO AND SO
IN THE FUTURE WE WILL BE HAVING
SOME EXTENSIVE CONVERSATIONS
ABOUT ERRORS IN THE REPORT
PUBLISHED BY THE DOLEN GROUP.
&gt;&gt; WE WILL ALSO TALK ABOUT SOME
ERRORS IN THE LAMBETH REPORT
THAT WAS PUBLISHED IN TWENTY
FOURTEEN.
AND SO WHILE LOTS OF PEOPLE
LIKE TO QUOTE THE DOLAN GROUP
REPORT AND SAY OH MY GOSH, THEY
FOUND NO BIAS AND NO
DISPARITIES IN ETHNICITIES AND
TRAFFIC STOPS AND IN FACT THEY
OFTEN LIKE TO QUOTE ON THEIR
WEBSITE ABOUT HOW IN ANN ARBOR
THEY ACTUALLY FOUND
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WHITE
MALE DRIVERS.
IT
TURNS OUT THAT THERE ARE
SOME FLAWS IN THEIR RESEARCH
THAT ARE PRETTY EGREGIOUS NOT
JUST TO RESEARCHERS BUT TO
THIRD GRADERS DOING MATH.
AND SO THERE IS SOME
CONVERSATION ABOUT HAVING GOING
BACK TO THE DOLEN GROUP AND
ASKING THEM ABOUT PERHAPS
TAKING ANN ARBOR OFF THEIR
WEBSITE AND USING US AS AN
ADVERTISEMENT FOR GOOD WORK.
THAT&apos;S A CONVERSATION WE&apos;LL BE
HAVING WITH COUNCIL AND I&apos;LL BE
SHARING WITH YOU GUYS KIND
OF AN INFORMAL REPORT JUST
SHOWING SOME OF THE ERRORS JUST
MATH ERRORS IN THAT REPORT.
I DON&apos;T WANT TO GET IN THE
WEEDS ABOUT STATISTICAL
SIGNIFICANCE BUT THERE WERE
THERE WERE A NUMBER OF ERRORS.
THOSE ARE NOT THINGS THAT
HAPPEN WHEN YOU USE INDEPENDENT
RESEARCHERS WHO ARE USED TO
DOING RESEARCHERS.
THIS IS A CONSULTING GROUP, NOT
A GROUP OF STATISTICIANS.
AND SO WHAT IT SORT OF LOOKS
LIKE I DON&apos;T KNOW BECAUSE I
HAVEN&apos;T SPOKEN WITH THE DOLEN
GROUP BUT MY HYPOTHESIS IS THAT
IT LOOKS LIKE THEY WERE
PROVIDED WITH SOME STATS AND
THEY DIDN&apos;T UNDERSTAND WHAT MAN
SO THEY SAID HEY, NO BIAS WHEN
THEY ACTUALLY ARE VERY CLEARLY
SHOWING BIAS IN THEIR OWN
RESULTS.
&gt;&gt; THEY ARE SHOWING THIS
DISPARITIES IN TRAFFIC STOPS
AND THEY ACTUALLY SHOW IT IN
THE REPORT AND UNDERNEATH A
GRAPH FOR EXAMPLE, THEY&apos;LL SAY
NO DISPARITIES WHEN THEY HAVE
IN FACT SHOWN THEM ON THE PAGE
AND SO THOSE THE KINDS
OF THINGS THAT WHEN YOU HAVE AN
INDEPENDENT OUTSIDE GROUP FOR
WHOM YOU HAVE NOT PAID FOR A
RESULT OUTSIDE RESEARCH, YOU&apos;RE
NOT GOING TO COME TO
CONCLUSIONS ABOUT WHAT THE DATA
MEAN.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S FOR THIS COMMISSION.
THAT&apos;S FOR THE COMMUNITY TO
DECIDE WHAT THOSE THINGS MEAN.
THEY&apos;RE GOING TO SHOW YOU WHAT
THE DATA ARE AND ASK A LOT
OF QUESTIONS ABOUT WHAT THEY
MEAN.
&gt;&gt; BUT IT&apos;S FOR THE COMMUNITY
TO DECIDE IN THE LAMBETH
REPORT, FOR EXAMPLE, THEY MADE
A DECISION THAT IF
AFRICAN-AMERICAN DRIVERS WERE
ONLY DISCRIMINATED AGAINST ONE
AND A HALF TIMES AS MUCH AS
WHITE DRIVERS, THAT WOULD BE AN
ACCEPTABLE LEVEL
OF DISCRIMINATION.
AND SO ANYTHING OVER THAT WOULD
BE CONSIDERED PROBLEMATIC.
AND SO IN OUR STATISTICAL
MEETING GROUP WE HAD A PERSON
FROM THE HUMAN RIGHTS
COMMISSION SAY BUT IF I&apos;M AN
AFRICAN-AMERICAN DRIVER IT IS
IS INJURIOUS TO ME TO
DISCRIMINATED AGAINST ONE AND A
HALF TIMES.
AND I THINK IN ANN ARBOR WE
COULD GO FOR THE GOAL OF ALL
DRIVERS BEING TREATED THE SAME.
I DON&apos;T THINK THERE SHOULD BE
AN EXPECTATION THAT
AFRICAN-AMERICAN DRIVERS SHOULD
WALK AROUND AND SAY WELL AT
LEAST I&apos;M ONLY DISCRIMINATED
AGAINST, YOU KNOW, ONE AND A
HALF TIMES AS MUCH.
&gt;&gt; I FIND THAT TO BE
UNREASONABLE.
I DON&apos;T THINK ANYBODY HERE
WOULD FIND THAT TO BE
REASONABLE.
I DON&apos;T THINK THAT&apos;S WHAT ANN
ARBOR WOULD ASPIRE TO.
AND YET THAT IS VERY CLEARLY
STATED IN THE LAMBETH REPORT.
IT&apos;S NOT HERE AND IT&apos;S NOT A
HIDDEN AGENDA.
IT&apos;S JUST A SENTENCE THAT SAYS
THAT THAT&apos;S THEIR EXPECTATION
AND HEY, IT&apos;S NOT AS BAD IN
CHICAGO SO THIS SHOULD BE FINE
WITH YOU AS A BLACK DRIVER.
THOSE ARE NOT THE KINDS
OF THINGS THAT THAT OUR REPORT
WILL BE SAYING.
WE WILL NOT BE MAKING
ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT WHAT&apos;S
TOLERABLE.
WE&apos;LL JUST BE TALKING ABOUT
WHAT THE DATA AND THEN HAVING
LOTS OF COMMUNITY CONVERSATIONS
I HOPE ABOUT WHAT YOU MEAN.
LET&apos;S USE THESE BULLET POINTS
IN THE RESOLUTION.
I THINK THE CHIEF WAS WAS AT
THE LAST MEETING AND WE TALKED
ABOUT NOT THAT THIS RESOLUTION
HAS TO BE VETTED BY THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT BUT I THINK SOME
UNDERSTANDING THAT THESE BULLET
POINTS CAN EASILY BE PULLED OUT
OF THE DATA.
AND I KNOW THAT THERE WAS A
DISCUSSION LAST MONTH ABOUT THE
FACT THAT THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
IS LOOKING FOR A NEW DATA
FORMAT TO COLLECT DATA FOR ALL
POLICE THINGS PERIOD OR FOR THE
STATE AGAIN FOR THE OTHER.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, BUT WE KNOW THAT IT
NEEDS YOU MAYBE PULL THIS DATA
FROM IT OR SOMETHING.
I&apos;M NOT FOR SURE IT WON&apos;T BE
THAT SO NOT SO THEY WANT A
DASHBOARD AND THEY NEED
DASHBOARD.
SO THERE DATA LOTS OF STANDARD
FROM IS COLLECTED DATA RIGHT
NOW AND IT&apos;S COLLECTED DATA WE
CAN EASILY GET HAVE ALREADY
GOTTEN AND WE&apos;VE GOTTEN MOST
OF IT AND ALSO IT&apos;S NOT RELATED
TO THEIR THEIR DATA INFORMATION
PERSON WHO CAME BRIEFLY AND
THEN LEFT THESE DATA WERE
ACTUALLY DISTRIBUTED TO US
BEFORE HIS ARRIVAL AND SO IT
DOESN&apos;T TAKE AN EXPERT TO DO
THIS EITHER.
&gt;&gt; AND THIS IS THAT DATA FROM
WHAT YEAR WE HAVE TWENTY
SEVENTEEN TWENTY EIGHTEEN
TWENTY NINETEEN AND TWENTY
TWENTY THAT WAS THE CLAIM BUT
THEY WERE DISTRIBUTED TO US
BEFORE JEFF MCDOUGALL&apos;S ARRIVAL
AND SO IT DOESN&apos;T TAKE A DATA
EXPERT TO BE ABLE TO DO IT
RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; IT JUST TAKES THE
DOWNLOADING OF THE DATA AND
HANDING IT OVER.
&gt;&gt; GOT IT.
OK THANK YOU FOR CLARIFYING.
YEAH
.
WITH THAT BEING SAID I DON&apos;T
SEE ANY PROBLEM WITH I DON&apos;T
SEE ANY PROBLEM WITH THE WAY
THE RESOLUTION IS CURRENTLY
WRITTEN.
THANK YOU.
DOES HE WANT TO WEIGH IN?
WE HAVE DR. KARPIAK WITH US WHO
IS THE LEAD RESEARCHER AT
EASTERN MICHIGAN UNIVERSITY.
SHE&apos;S PARTICIPATING WITH US.
I CAN&apos;T TELL IF THERE&apos;S A
COMMENT THAT KAAVYA OR I HAVE
NO COMMENT.
I&apos;M JUST LISTENING.
OK, THANK YOU.
WASN&apos;T SURE
.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE ANY MORE DISCUSSION
OF THIS OR IS THERE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THIS RESOLUTION?
COUNCIL MEMBER AMAWI YOU HAD A
QUESTION.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER PHILIPS
FOR ASKING SOME GOOD QUESTIONS
.
I WONDER IF YOU CAN HIGHLIGHT
OR MAYBE GIVE US A LITTLE BIT
MORE INFORMATION AS IT RELATES
TO THE FIRST AND THIRD RESOLVE
CLAUSE AND THAT IS THE
INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY POLICE
OVERSIGHT COMMISSION REQUEST
THAT THE ANN ARBOR POLICE
DEPARTMENT DEVELOP PROCEDURES
AND POLICIES TO REASONABLY
ENSURE THAT INFORMATION IS
COMPLETE AND ACCURATE.
&gt;&gt; HAS THE COMMISSION SEEN ANY
CURRENT PROCEDURES OR POLICIES?
HAVE ANY PROCEDURES?
ARE THERE ANY PROCEDURES AND
POLICIES IN PLACE?
&gt;&gt; WE YES THAT THERE ARE THIS
THIS INFORMATION IS AVAILABLE
AND I JUST WAS WONDERING AGAIN
WHETHER THERE IS SOMETHING
THERE TO BEGIN WITH.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
SO THIS IS A PRETTY STANDARD
CLAUSE WE&apos;RE JUST ASKING THAT
THEY MAKE SURE THAT IS COMPLETE
ACCURATE.
SO YOU WANT TO ALWAYS MAKE SURE
THAT YOU&apos;RE ASKING THE AGENCIES
PROVIDING THE DATA TO MAKE SURE
THAT TO THE BEST OF THEIR
ABILITY IT&apos;S COMPLETE AND
ACCURATE AND OK.
MY QUESTION WAS WHETHER THERE
WAS ANY ALREADY POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES THAT THE COMMISSION
HAS SEEN.
YES.
AND THEY&apos;RE ONLINE.
THEY ARE KIND ENOUGH TO PUT
THESE ONLINE AND THEY HAVE
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES IN
PLACE TO MAKE SURE THAT THEIR
DATA ARE ACCURATE AND THEY WORK
REALLY HARD TO MAKE SURE THAT
THEIR DATA ARE ACCURATE AND
COMPLETE.
&gt;&gt; WE HIT IT.
WE HAD A PUBLIC SPEAKER LAST
CITY COUNCIL MEETING WHO
COMPLAINED ABOUT THE THE
FAILURE TO LIVE UP TO THE
COMMITMENTS OF PLACING THESE
POLICIES OR PROCEDURES FOR
PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.
SO I&apos;M SORRY I&apos;M NOT I&apos;M JUST
ON THE HEELS OF THAT MEETING
LAST NIGHT WAS ONE OF THE
COMMENTERS UH HE I THINK IT&apos;S
PROBABLY TWELVE TWELVE THAT
THEY WERE TALKING ABOUT THE
POLICE DEPARTMENTS BEING PRETTY
TRANSPARENT ABOUT PUTTING THESE
KINDS OF POLICIES ONLINE AND
THEY&apos;VE BEEN ONLINE FOR A WHILE
AND SO YEAH RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; WELL THANK YOU.
SO WE&apos;RE LOOKING FOR PROMOTION.
WE ARE I MAKE THE MOTION THAT
WE ACCEPT THE RESOLUTION IS
PRESENTED TO THE CITY COUNCIL
REGARDING THE ANN ARBOR TRAFFIC
TRANSPARENCY.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE A SECOND ALL IN
FAVOR OF THE MOTION I ANY
OPPOSED?
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
SO WE ARE THE THIRD IN THE
GROUP.
I FIND THAT APPROPRIATE.
WE STARTED THIS AND WE FINISHED
THIS AND NEXT WE&apos;LL BE WORKING
ON SOME OTHER KINDS OF TRAFFIC
KINDS OF RESOLUTIONS.
UM, NEXT UP VICE CHAIR TO
HARGRAVES.
WE WE&apos;RE GOING TO TALK ABOUT A
TIMELINE FOR SOME FEEDBACK
LISTENING SESSIONS AND THIS WAS
REGARDING THE CITY&apos;S COMMITMENT
TO GET FEEDBACK FROM THE
COMMUNITY REGARDING THE UNARM
RESPONSE PLAN RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; AND SO WE WE WERE HOPING TO
HAVE SOME OF THAT INFORMATION
BUT I WAS RECENTLY DIRECTED TO
THE CITY&apos;S WEBSITE WHERE
THERE&apos;S ACTUALLY A REQUEST FOR
PROPOSALS THAT THE CITY HAS PUT
OUT FOR GROUPS TO RESPOND IF
THEY WOULD LIKE TO HEAD THIS UP
.
SO BASICALLY WHAT I WAS READING
FROM THERE IS THAT THE CITY IS
GOING TO BE HIRING AN OUTSIDE
AGENCY TO COME IN AND RUN THESE
COMMUNITY FEEDBACK SESSIONS IN
THE COMING MONTHS THAT PROPOSAL
PROCESS I BELIEVE WAS OPEN
UNTIL NEXT WEEK.
SO WE MOST LIKELY WILL HAVE
MORE INFORMATION AT
OUR NEXT
MEETING BUT DO NOT HAVE ANY
RIGHT NOW.
&gt;&gt; SO IT&apos;S RFP IT LOOKS LIKE
TWENTY TWO DASH TWENTY EIGHT.
THE DUE DATE IS MARCH 30TH AND
WHAT HAPPENED WAS VICE CHAIR TO
HARGRAVES AND I HAVE A REGULAR
STANDING MEETING WITH THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR AND THE ASSISTANT
TO THE ADMINISTRATOR TO TALK
ABOUT THE PROGRESS WITH THE
ARMED RESPONSE PLAN AND JUST
AND THAT STARTED OF COURSE WITH
FROM THE RESOLUTION ITSELF AS
WE WERE INCLUDED IN THAT.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE
WERE VERY CLEAR ON IS THAT WE
WANTED COMMUNITIES THAT ARE
TYPICALLY EXCLUDED FROM THESE
PROCESSES TO BE CONSULTED.
SO WHEN YOU HAVE A ZOO MEETING
AND IT&apos;S NOT WELL PUBLICIZED,
PEOPLE WHO ARE COMPETENT WITH
ZOOM ZOOM IN AND THEY
PARTICIPATE BUT YOU SEEM TO BE
REACHING THE SAME KINDS
OF PEOPLE ALL THE TIME.
AND SO ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
WAS VERY IMPORTANT TO US WAS
THAT THERE BE A COMMITMENT TO
GO OUT INTO COMMUNITIES IN
PERSON IF NEEDED OR BY OTHER
MEANS TO MAKE SURE THAT PEOPLE
WHO HAVE THE INTEREST IN ON&apos;EM
RESPONSE ARE SURVEYED AND WE
FOUND THAT, YOU KNOW, WARMING
CENTERS, FOR EXAMPLE, HAD NOT
BEEN ABLE TO CONTRIBUTE TO
CONVERSATIONS ABOUT UNARMED
RESPONSE.
&gt;&gt; WE HEARD FROM PEOPLE AT FOR
EXAMPLE, AT THE DELENA CENTER
WHO WOULD LIKE TO HAVE
COMMENTED ON IT UNARMED
RESPONSE PLAN.
WE UNDERSTAND THAT THERE ARE
OTHER COMMUNITIES, CENTERS AND
POPULATIONS IN THE CITY THAT
WOULD HAVE LIKED TO HAVE
COMMENTED ON THE PROCESS BUT
HAD NOT BEEN ABLE TO THUS FAR
IN AND PARTICIPATED IN THE CITY
SURVEY PROCESS WHICH WAS ALSO
ONLINE AND SO IT LOOKS LIKE
THIS RFP WAS DEVELOPED SUCH
THAT THE CITY WILL BE PAYING
FOR SOMEONE TO TO GO DO THAT
AND THE OBJECTIVE IS AS THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR SEEKING THE
SERVICES OF AN AGENCY TO HELP
LEAD A PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
CAMPAIGN RELATED TO THE
FLEDGLING UNARMED CRISIS
RESPONSE PROGRAM.
GIVEN THE BROAD COMMUNITY THAT
WE&apos;RE TRYING TO REACH, WE WANT
TO MAKE SURE THAT OUR
ENGAGEMENT EFFORTS ARE
MEANINGFUL AND THAT THE DATA
FEEDBACK WE COLLECT FROM
COMMUNITY MEMBERS AND PARTNERS
IS ORGANIZED AND PRESENTED TO
CITY LEADERS IN A LOGICAL AND
USEFUL WAY.
FOR THIS REASON WE&apos;RE
INTERESTED IN ENGAGING A
CONSULTANT WITH EXPERIENCE AND
LEADING THIS TYPE OF ENGAGEMENT
WHO HAS EXTENSIVE FACILITATION
EXPERIENCE IN LARGE GROUP
MEETING SETTINGS AND WHO HAS
EXTENSIVE EXPERIENCE LEADING
FOCUS GROUPS OR SIMILAR
SESSIONS AND WHO IS ABLE TO
CONSOLIDATE QUALITATIVE DATA
INTO USEFUL REPORTING FORMATS
FOR DECISION MAKERS.
&gt;&gt; SO IT&apos;S OUR HOPE THAT AFTER
MARCH 30TH THERE WILL BE
OBVIOUSLY A SELECTION PROCESS
AND THAT THE CITY WILL THEN
REPORT BACK ABOUT ITS TIMELINE
TO ENGAGE THE COMMUNITY IN THIS
PROCESS.
YES, HOPEFULLY IT WON&apos;T BE AN
18 MONTH PROCESS I BELIEVE WHEN
WE&apos;RE ALREADY A YEAR FROM THE
MAYOR&apos;S FORMER FIRST.
&gt;&gt; WELL, AND THAT WAS APRIL
TWENTY TWENTY ONE.
&gt;&gt; SO WE&apos;RE ABOUT A YEAR OUT
FROM THAT RESOLUTION.
WE WAITED UNTIL DECEMBER FOR A
REPORT AND AS WE ALL KNOW, THAT
WAS MAYBE NOT WHAT ANY OF US
WERE EXPECTING OR HOPING BUT WE
ARE NOW INTO THE PROCESS AND ON
MARCH TWENTY FIRST THERE WILL
BE A VOTE FROM CITY COUNCIL
ABOUT HOW TO ALLOCATE FUNDS
FROM THE FROM ARPA FROM THE
AMERICAN RESCUE PLAN AND WE
HOPE THAT SOME WILL BE DEVOTED
TO AN UNARMED RESPONSE PROGRAM
AND THEN WE&apos;LL START THEN WE
HOPE A PROCESS WILL START ABOUT
ENGAGING, YOU KNOW, SORT
OF DETERMINING WHAT SHOULD BE
REQUIRED IN SETTING UP SUCH A
PROGRAM.
DON&apos;T YOU IS THERE A TIMELINE
FOR THAT?
BECAUSE WHAT I&apos;M SUGGESTING
OVER HERE I&apos;M PROPOSING THAT IN
MAY WHEN WE MEET WITH THE
PUBLIC THAT WOULD BE OUR MAIN
THEME TO LOOK INTO AND WE MIGHT
HAVE SOME KIND OF FEEDBACK FROM
THE COMMUNITY AT THAT TIME.
I THINK THAT IS IMPORTANT
ESPECIALLY IF WE&apos;RE ABLE TO
MEET OUTSIDE MAY IF WE DO AN
OUTSIDE PUBLIC FORUM AGAIN I
WOULD EXPECT THAT AN ARMED
RESPONSE WOULD BE A BIG PIECE
OF THAT AND WE WOULD BE ABLE TO
GET SOME COMMUNITY FEEDBACK AT
THAT POINT.
WE COULD CERTAINLY MAKE IT A
POINT TO COLLECT SOME
QUALITATIVE DATA AT THAT POINT
WE CERTAINLY HAVE RESEARCHERS
AND VOLUNTEERS, LOTS OF PUBLIC
HEALTH PEOPLE IN OUR COMMUNITY
,LOTS OF OTHER QUALITATIVE
EXPERTS CERTAINLY AT EASTERN ON
THE SMART TEAM AND OTHERS WHO
MIGHT BE WILLING TO COLLECT
SUCH DATA BUT CERTAINLY TO
SPEAK TO THE CITY AT THAT POINT
VIA OUR MEETING TO TALK ABOUT
THAT.
SO I THINK THAT&apos;S AN EXCELLENT
POINT.
I HOPE THAT BY MAY WE WOULD
HAVE A TIMELINE AND BE ABLE TO
TO HAVE AN EXPECTATION OF WHERE
THESE COMMUNITY OUTREACH
SESSIONS ARE HAPPENING.
&gt;&gt; I THINK MAY IS A REASONABLE
EXPECTATION FOR THAT.
FINGERS CROSSED I AM WITH VICE
CHAIR TODORA HARGRAVES THAT WE
ARE HOPING WILL NOT BE A AN 18
MONTH PROCESS OF SEEKING INPUT
FROM CITIZENS IN THIS
COMMUNITY.
&gt;&gt; AND IF WE ARE GOING TO HAVE
THAT, I WOULD LIKE TO HAVE THAT
ADVERTISE TO THE COMMUNITY SO
THEY WILL BE AWARE THAT THIS IS
ONE OF THE THEMES THAT WILL BE
DISCUSSED AND THE OPEN MEETING
AND ME YEAH.
SO WE WILL WE WILL DO OUR BEST
TO PUBLICIZE THOSE SESSIONS
WHEN WE KNOW ABOUT THEM AND
THAT IF THAT IS THE THEME
OF OUR MEETING WE WILL
CERTAINLY SPREAD THAT FAR AND
WIDE AND ENCOURAGE EVERYBODY
ACROSS THE CITY TO ATTEND AS
WELL.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; THE NEXT ITEM ON OUR AGENDA
WAS TALKING ABOUT UNARM
RESPONSIBLE.
THAT DID NOT HAPPEN YESTERDAY.
IT WAS POSTPONED UNTIL I
BELIEVE APRIL 4TH WHATEVER THAT
MONDAY IS BECAUSE WE WERE GOING
TO TALK ABOUT IT.
I THINK SOMETIMES IT GETS LOST
IN THESE DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
UNARM RESPONSE IS WHO MIGHT
BENEFIT FROM THAT?
&gt;&gt; I HAPPEN TO BE INVITED TO
TALK TO A GROUP WHO HAD A
NUMBER OF YOUNG PEOPLE WHO ARE
IMPACTED BY MENTAL HEALTH
CHALLENGES, ONE OF WHOM TOLD
HER STORY AND ASKED THAT I READ
IT TODAY.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO READ AN EXCERPT
FROM THIS.
SHE INDICATED THAT I COULD SAY
HER NAME.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M JUST GOING TO SAY HER
FIRST NAME THOUGH SHE&apos;S APRIL
AND THIS IS WHAT SHE WRITES I
AM TWENTY FOUR GOING ON.
TWENTY FIVE YEARS OLD NEXT
MONTH I&apos;VE BEEN LIVING WITH
MENTAL HEALTH ISSUES SINCE I
WAS TEN YEARS OLD.
I WAS VERY SCARED AT FIRST WHEN
I FOUND OUT MY DIAGNOSIS PEOPLE
WERE SO JUDGMENTAL OF ME AND MY
MENTAL HEALTH BECAUSE OF THE
NEGATIVE STIGMA I WAS QUIET
ABOUT MY MENTAL ILLNESS AND I
DIDN&apos;T TELL ANYBODY I DIDN&apos;T
KNOW WHAT TO DO WHEN I TOLD MY
GRANDMOTHER SHE HAD TEARS IN
HER EYES AND SHE FELT SAD
BECAUSE THE REST OF MY FAMILY
WOULD NOT ACCEPT ME BUT SHE
DID.
&gt;&gt; AS YEARS WENT BY I STARTED
HAVING MORE AND MORE TROUBLE
WITH MY STIGMATIZED MENTAL
LNESS.
I RAN AWAY FROM A GROUP HOME
THEY CALLED THE POLICE AT THE
TIME I RAN INTO THE WOODS, SAT
THERE AND CRIED.
THEN THE POLICE CAME THE
OFFICER TOLD ME TO GET ON MY
KNEES AND PUT A GUN TO MY HEAD
AT THAT MOMENT I WAS THINKING
THAT I ONLY HAD FIVE TO TEN
MORE SECONDS TO LIVE.
IT WAS THE MOST TRAUMATIZING
THING THAT HAS EVER HAPPENED TO
ME.
BUT NOW WITH FRESH START
CLUBHOUSE I HAVE FOUND A
COMMUNITY OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE A
MENTAL ILLNESS LIKE ME.
I NOW KNOW THE SITUATION HAS
MADE ME INTO A STRONGER PERSON
AND I&apos;M THANKFUL THAT I HAVE
SUPPORT FROM FRESH START MY
GRANDPARENTS AND MICHIGAN
REHABILITATION SERVICES NO ONE
WITH MENTAL ILLNESS SHOULD
EXPERIENCE WHAT I EXPERIENCED
AND SO THE PEOPLE WHO WOULD BE
SERVED BY AN UNARMED RESPONSE
PROGRAM ARE MEMBERS OF OUR
COMMUNITY.
THEY ARE PEOPLE WE SEE EVERY
DAY AND THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO
DESERVE APPROPRIATE RESPONSES
TO TRAUMAS THAT SO MANY PEOPLE
HAVE.
&gt;&gt; AND SO I WANTED TO KIND
OF PUT A FACE IF I COULD ON A
PERSON WHO WOULD CERTAINLY BE
WELL SERVED BY SUCH A CRISIS
RESPONSE A APLA.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
SO NEXT ON OUR AGENDA, VICE
CHAIR TODORA HARGRAVES WILL
DISCUSS THE APRE.
SO IF MANY OF YOU RECALL THIS
CONTRACT FOR THE POLICE
OFFICERS THIS SITUATION CAME UP
IN TWENTY TWENTY RIGHT IN THE
SPRING AND IT WAS PULLED FROM
THE AGENDA DUE TO THE EVENTS AT
THAT TIME AND THE CALLS FROM
THE PUBLIC TO HAVE COUNCIL
REVISIT THE CONTRACT AND A LOT
OF PEOPLE HAD QUESTIONS AND SO
ON.
WE WERE BROUGHT IN SOME MEMBERS
OF OAK PARK WE REVIEWED THE
CONTRACT.
WE MADE SOME COMMENTS THERE
WERE SOME THINGS THAT THAT WERE
TALKED ABOUT NEGOTIATED IN DUE
TO OUR FEEDBACK AT THE TIME
WHEN THE CONTRACT WAS SIGNED IT
WAS ALREADY ONE YEAR IN AND
THEN WE WENT THROUGH A YEAR.
SO NOW WE ARE IN THE THIRD YEAR
OF THE CONTRACT AND IT WILL BE
ENTERING NEGOTIATIONS IN THE
COMING WEEKS OR NEXT MONTH.
SO THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR&apos;S
OFFICE HAS AGAIN REQUESTED OUR
FEEDBACK AND THOUGHTS IF ANY
OF US HAVE THINGS THAT THEY
WOULD LIKE TALK ABOUT OR
EXPLAIN TO US ANYTHING LIKE
THAT IS THEY GO INTO THE
NEGOTIATIONS.
&gt;&gt; SO I KNOW ONE OF THE THINGS
I SENT AN EMAIL TO ASSISTANT
CITY ADMINISTRATOR FOURNIER
TODAY ASKING ABOUT HOW EXACTLY
THE PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE
WORKS RIGHT NOW IN HIS
CONTRACT.
IT IS FOUR YEARS THAT THEY HOLD
ON TO ANY DISCIPLINE THAT THEY
RECEIVE AND THEY RECEIVE
PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE FROM
THERE.
BUT IT WASN&apos;T VERY CLEAR AS WE
GO THROUGH OUR REVIEWS
OF CITIZEN COMPLAINTS HOW
EXACTLY THAT IS APPLIED.
SO WE NOW KNOW FROM OUR MEETING
LAST
WEEK WITH THE DEPUTY
CHIEFS THAT THERE&apos;S ACTUALLY
THE WHAT&apos;S IN THE CONTRACT WITH
THE CONTRACT SAYS FOR
PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE BUT THEN
ALSO THE HUMAN RESOURCES POLICY
FOR PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE.
&gt;&gt; SO I KNOW THAT ONE OF THE
THINGS I&apos;M GOING TO BE DOING IS
REVIEWING BOTH OF THESE, SEEING
HOW THEY MESH TO GET A GOOD OR
A BETTER UNDERSTANDING OF HOW
IT&apos;S ACTUALLY APPLIED IN THE
SITUATIONS AND THEN DETERMINING
HOW THINGS DO ACTUALLY INCREASE
WHEN YOU&apos;RE REVIEWING
COMPLAINTS AND YOU SEE A LOT
OF VERBAL COUNSELING, VERBAL
COUNSELING.
WELL AT SOME POINT YOU WOULD
THINK THAT VERBAL COUNSELING
GETS KICKED UP TO A WRITTEN
WRITTEN WARNING SO THOSE THE
THINGS THAT WE NEED TO GET AN
UNDERSTANDING OF HOW THAT THOSE
FUNCTION SO AND WE&apos;VE HAD A
LITTLE BIT OF FEEDBACK FROM
SOME COMMISSIONERS ABOUT SOME
QUESTIONS THAT THEY HAVE ABOUT
THE CONTRACT.
I&apos;D ENCOURAGE EVERYONE WE WE
ALSO HAVE A PTA MEETING AND
WE&apos;LL HAVE ANOTHER ONE COMING
UP IN APRIL, THE FIRST WEEK IN
APRIL I BELIEVE WITH THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR, AN ASSISTANT
CITY ADMINISTRATOR REGARDING
THE APPEAL CONTRACT TO GET OUR
FEEDBACK AND THAT WAS PUSHED
BACK A LITTLE BIT.
SO IF YOU HAVE NOT YET
SUBMITTED FEEDBACK OR EVEN
QUESTIONS AS YOU READ THE
POLICE CONTRACT, I KNOW
EVERYBODY HAS A COPY OF IT.
IF THERE ARE THINGS THAT YOU
HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, THE PROGRESSIVE
DISCIPLINE BEFORE HAD AND BASED
ON WHAT TWENTY FOUR MONTHS THE
SO THE LOOK BACK PERIOD THAT
YOU COULD HAVE FOR LOOKING AT
AN OFFICER&apos;S SORT OF PAST
DISCIPLINARY ACTION, WHATEVER
THAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN WAS TWENTY
FOUR MONTHS AND ONE OF THE
THINGS WE ASKED FOR WAS THAT
THAT BE EXTENDED AND SO THE
REASON WHY IT IS NOW FOUR YEARS
IS BECAUSE OF OUR INPUT ON THE
LAST POLICE CONTRACT.
BUT CERTAINLY ONE OF THE THINGS
WE ASKED FOR EVERY TIME WE&apos;LL
ASK FOR IT AGAIN IS TERMINATION
OF ARBITRATE OF OF THE
ABOLISHMENT OF ARBITRATION FOR
TERMINATION.
WE FEEL LIKE IF THE POLICE
CHIEF FIRE SOMEBODY THAT&apos;S A
PRETTY SEVERE STEP AND THAT
THAT PERSON SHOULD REMAIN
FIRED.
I DO UNDERSTAND THAT THAT COULD
BE A FINANCIALLY SIGNIFICANT
CONCESSION FOR THE UNION TO
MAKE.
BUT WE&apos;RE CERTAINLY GOING TO
ASK FOR THAT AGAIN, WE THINK IF
YOUR POLICE CHIEF GOES THROUGH
THE STEPS TO DOCUMENT THAT
SOMEONE SHOULD BE DISMISSED
THAT IF THEY DO GET THEIR JOB
BACK THROUGH ARBITRATION THEY
KIND OF HAVE A LICENSE TO DO
WHATEVER THEY WANT TO DO
BECAUSE THE POLICE CHIEF WAS
NOT ABLE TO PREVAIL IN THEIR
TERMINATION.
WE THINK THAT IF YOU HAVE HIRED
A COMPETENT POLICE CHIEF AND WE
CERTAINLY HAVE IN THIS TOWN,
THEN IF THAT POLICE CHIEF
DETERMINES THAT YOU SHOULD BE
FIRED, THEN YOU PROBABLY SHOULD
BE FIRED.
I AM NOT NAIVE, HOWEVER, TO HOW
THE NEGOTIATION WORK
NEGOTIATIONS WORK AND WHAT IT
WOULD TAKE TO GET RID OF THAT.
BUT I DO NOT THINK WE SHOULD
STOP ASKING FOR THAT OR STOP
PUSHING FOR THAT STOP LOBBYING
FOR THAT.
OF COURSE THE OTHER SIDE
OF THAT COIN IS WHAT IF YOU
HAVE A TOLERANCE FOR A POLICE
CHIEF AND HE JUST FIRES PEOPLE
BECAUSE HE DOES NOT LIKE THE
WAY YOU RAISE YOUR EYEBROWS
THEN THAT MEANS THE CITY
COUNCIL ALWAYS HAS THE ABILITY
TO FIRE THAT POLICE CHIEF.
&gt;&gt; BUT SINCE THEY HAVE
DETERMINED THAT THE POLICE
CHIEF WE HAVE NOW CERTAINLY
COMPETENT TO DO SO, WE BELIEVE
THAT YOU KNOW, IN THE INSTANCE
THAT THE CHIEF DECIDES TO FIRE
SOMEONE, THEY SHOULD PROBABLY
STAY FIRED AND THE CONSEQUENCE
OF THEM NOT BEING ABLE TO FIRE
PEOPLE IS SIGNIFICANT.
&gt;&gt; AND SO THERE ARE THINGS LIKE
THAT THAT WE UNDERSTAND ARE
VERY, VERY CHALLENGING BUT
THAT&apos;S NOT GOING TO STOP US
FROM ASKING ABOUT THEM.
BUT THERE COULD ALSO BE SMALL
THINGS.
SO FROM THE BIG TO THE SMALL
THEY WARRANT OUR DISCUSSION,
OUR CONSIDERATION AND OUR
REVIEW OF THAT CONTRACT.
SO CERTAINLY AS YOU GUYS
CONTINUE TO LOOK OVER THAT, IF
YOU HAVE MORE COMMENTS THAN
THOSE TO VICE CHAIR TO DOOR
HARGRAVES AND MYSELF AND WE&apos;RE
COMPILING THEM AND THEN IN OUR
CONVERSATION WILL SAY HEY, HE&apos;S
HERE ARE THE THINGS THAT WE ARE
CONCERNED ABOUT HERE ARE THE
THINGS WE&apos;D LIKE THE CITY TO
TAKE INTO ACCOUNT AS YOU REVIEW
THE CONTRACT DOES ANYBODY NEED
A PRINTED COPY?
&gt;&gt; BECAUSE I THINK WE I THINK
WE DIDN&apos;T HAVE DENIECE PRINT
THEM WHILE WE&apos;RE HERE.
IT IS SEVENTY SEVEN PAGES LONG.
&gt;&gt; YES, ALONE GOOD REASON NO,
IT&apos;S A LONG READ.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S A LONG IT&apos;S A LONG READ
BUT YOU KNOW I KNOW I CAN BE
OLD SCHOOL SOMETIMES ON PAPER I
MIGHT READ THINGS DIFFERENT.
I THINK I&apos;M USED TO READING
EVERYTHING ONLINE BUT THERE WAS
A TIME WHEN SO IF YOU DO WANT
TO PRINT A COPY THAT&apos;S
CERTAINLY SOMETHING THAT OUR
ADMINISTRATOR COULD GET FOR
ANYBODY WHO NEEDS ONE AND YOU
COULD GET IT WHILE HERE TODAY
IF YOU LIKE ANYTHING ELSE ON
THAT.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I THINK THAT&apos;S GOOD.
ALL RIGHT.
SO NO NEW BUSINESS I BELIEVE NO
REPORTS FROM COMMITTEES BUT WE
DO HAVE SOME COMMUNICATIONS.
WE&apos;RE I&apos;M SO WHEN A REPORT A
LITTLE BIT OUT ON OUR YOUTH
FORUM THAT HAPPENED LAST
SATURDAY I BELIEVE THAT WAS
ORGANIZED BY OUR YOUTH MEMBER
MAKHAYA SHIP COMMISSIONER
BILLUPS BROUGHT SOME YOUNG
FOLKS AND WE HAD SOME OTHER
YOUNG FOLKS WHO JOINED US AND
WE HAD A REALLY INTERESTING
CONVERSATION WITH YOUNG PEOPLE
ABOUT HOW THEY FELT ABOUT
POLICING AND THERE WERE SOME
THEMES THAT SEEMED TO RECUR.
COMMISSIONER BILLUPS WANT TO
SPEAK TO ANY OF THAT?
&gt;&gt; MR YOU CAN START NOW JUMP
IN.
&gt;&gt; OK, I I WAS THINKING THAT
ONE OF THE THEMES WAS
RELATIONSHIPS THAT THERE WAS A
CONVERSATION ABOUT DIFFERENT
TYPES OF ENCOUNTERS IN WHICH
YOUNG DIFFERENT WAYS IN WHICH
YOUNG PEOPLE ENCOUNTER POLICE,
WHETHER THAT IS IN SCHOOLS OR
NEAR SCHOOLS OR AROUND SCHOOLS
AND THEY TALKED A LITTLE BIT
ABOUT THEIR FRUSTRATIONS WITH
DISPARITIES THAT THEY SAW FROM
MAYBE ONE SCHOOL DISTRICT TO
ANOTHER IN TERMS OF THE WAY
STUDENTS WERE TREATED.
THEY TALKED ABOUT SOME OF THE
INTERACTIONS.
&gt;&gt; WE ASK THEM THINGS THAT
WOULD MAKE THEM FEEL MORE
COMFORTABLE.
WE ASKED THEM IF THEY IF THERE
WERE THINGS THEY THOUGHT MIGHT
IMPROVE THEIR RELATIONSHIPS
WITH POLICE.
WE ASKED THEM ABOUT OTHER
PEOPLE IN THE COMMUNITY WHO
MIGHT BE HELPFUL TO THEM IN
LIEU OF POLICE AND
COMMISSIONERS AND COUNCIL
MEMBERS.
SONG IS NOT HERE BUT I&apos;M GOING
TO TELL RETELL A PART OF A
STORY THAT SHE TALKED ABOUT IN
OUR YOUTH FORUM AND SHE TALKED
ABOUT SOME A GROUP OF A
COMMUNITY THAT HAD LOTS
OF SOMALIAN IMMIGRANTS IN SAN
DIEGO AND THERE WAS A PROBLEM
WITH SOME INTIMATE PARTNER
VIOLENCE AND THE POLICE HAD THE
SOLUTION THAT THEY WOULD ARREST
THE PERPETRATORS AND THE
COMMUNITY WAS SAYING IT&apos;S NOT
THAT HELPFUL IF YOU ARREST
EVERYONE BECAUSE THEN WE HAVE
YOU KNOW, THAT&apos;S GOING TO
IMPACT INCOME.
IT&apos;S GOING TO IMPACT STABILITY.
WE JUST REALLY WANT THE
INTIMATE PARTNER VIOLENCE AND
THE CONFLICT TO STOP AND SO THE
POLICE WERE LIKE IF WE ALL WANT
US TO ARREST THEM, WHAT DO YOU
WANT US TO DO?
LIKE WHAT ARE WE SUPPOSED TO DO
HERE?
&gt;&gt; HOW IS THIS GOING TO GET
RESOLVED?
AND THEY DEVELOP THEIR OWN
SYSTEM OF AUNTIES AND SO THEY
HAD A GROUP OF OLDER WOMEN WHO
ARE RESPECTED IN THE COMMUNITY
WHO BECAME MEDIATORS AND PEOPLE
COULD GO TO AUNTIES WHEN THEY
WERE FEELING FRUSTRATED.
THEY COULD GO TO AUNTIES WHEN
THEY FELT THEY HAD BEEN WRONGED
AND THE AUNTIES WOULD MEDIATE
THE SITUATION WITHOUT POLICE
AND WE ASKED YOUNG PEOPLE IF
THERE WERE OTHER WAYS IN WHICH
THERE WERE OTHER PEOPLE IN THE
COMMUNITY WHO MIGHT BE ABLE TO
HELP MEDIATE SOME OF THE ISSUES
THAT POLICE ARE CALLED FOR.
&gt;&gt; AS WE&apos;VE TALKED ABOUT MANY
TIMES YOU WE ASKED POLICE TO
INTERVENE IN LOTS OF DIFFERENT
KINDS OF SITUATIONS, EVEN THOSE
THAT ARE NOT NECESSARILY
RELATED TO CRIME BECAUSE THEY
ARE THE ONLY PEOPLE WHO WILL
ANSWER THE PHONE AT 3:00 A.M.
OR THE ONLY PEOPLE WHO WILL
ANSWER THE PHONE 24/7 AND SO WE
HAD SOME REALLY INTERESTING
CONVERSATIONS WITH THE YOUNG
PEOPLE.
I&apos;M TRYING TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO
COMPILE ALL OF THE NOTES.
I VOLUNTEERED TO TAKE THEM
ANONYMOUSLY.
SOME YOUNG PEOPLE ARE INSISTENT
THAT THEIR NAMES BE WRITTEN
DOWN.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, THEY WERE VERY, VERY
ADAMANT ABOUT THEIR CONVICTIONS
AND THE STATEMENTS THAT THEY
MADE.
IT WAS A REALLY I DYNAMIC GROUP
OF YOUNG PEOPLE AND I LEARNED A
LOT AND I WAS GRATEFUL TO HAVE
BEEN THERE.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
AND ALL OF THAT CAME A DESIRE
TO POSSIBLY DO THIS AGAIN.
ABSOLUTELY.
AND SO MAKE SURE THAT WE CAN
MAKE IT EVEN BROADER AND
GETTING MORE YOUNG PEOPLE THERE
TO HAVE AN IMPACT THIS WAY.
&gt;&gt; AND ONE PERSON SUGGESTED TO
ME THAT, YOU KNOW, THAT THAT WE
MAY BE INVITED INTO A SCHOOL TO
DO THAT AND THAT OUR YOUNG
PERSON AND A COUPLE OF US WILL
BE WELCOME TO TALK TO STUDENTS
IN COME TAKE IT TO THE
STUDENTS.
&gt;&gt; IN FACT, AT THEIR AT THEIR
SCHOOL.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT
WE&apos;RE EXPLORING AS WELL.
SO ALL IN ALL IT WAS A REALLY
GOOD I KNOW I LEARNED A LOT
COMMISSIONERS HARRISON,
BILLUPS, TODORA HARGRAVES ALL
RIGHT.
INSTRUCTOR DENISE JANEZ WAS
THERE, COUNCIL MEMBER SONG WAS
THERE AND OUR YOUNG PERSON ON
THE SHIP WAS THERE AND HAD A
LOVELY AGENDA.
WE STRAYED FROM THAT A LITTLE
BIT BUT ALL IN ALL I FELT LIKE
WE GOT SOME REALLY VALUABLE
FEEDBACK FROM THESE TEENAGERS
WHO HAD SOME INTERESTING THINGS
TO SAY ABOUT PUBLIC SAFETY AS
THEY EXPERIENCE IT NOW AND AS
THEY MIGHT HOPE TO EXPERIENCE
IT IN THE FUTURE.
&gt;&gt; KHOSHJAMAL, WHAT SORT
OF QUESTION RETAIN THE YOUNG
PEOPLE, WHAT THEY WOULD LIKE TO
BECOME POLICE OFFICERS?
&gt;&gt; YOU KNOW WHAT I DON&apos;T THINK
WE ASK THEM IF THEY WANTED TO
BECOME POLICE OFFICERS BUT THE
TOPIC CAME UP.
YEAH, WE DIDN&apos;T ASK THEM THAT
DIRECTLY.
UM, I THINK THERE WAS A MIXED
RESPONSE WITH THAT.
THERE WAS NOT AN AFFIRMATIVE
YES.
OF THAT DISCUSSION.
I MEAN I THINK IT&apos;S SOMETHING
WE SHOULD DEFINITELY BRING UP
IN A YOU WONDER WHY I&apos;M SAYING
THAT IS YOU KNOW, SOMETIMES
YOU
CAN MAKE A CHANGE FROM BEING
PART FROM WITHIN THEN FROM THE
OUTSIDE.
YEAH.
AND AND YOU KNOW, THIS IS ONE
OF THE ISSUES THAT WE HAVE TO
HAVE DIVERSE POLICE OFFICERS
REPRESENT THE DIFFERENT
COMMUNITIES AND UNLESS SOME
OF THOSE YOUNG MEN OR WOMEN
WOULD LIKE TO BE PART AND THERE
IS ROOM NOW AND THERE IS SPACE
AND POSSIBILITY FOR ANYONE TO
PLAN HIS OR HER LIFE TO BECOME
A POLICE OFFICER AND BE PART
OF THE FORCE AND TO SERVE THE
COMMUNITY THE WAY THEY KNOW
BEST.
YEAH, I DID BRING UP THE FACT
THAT I KNOW A YOUNG MAN WHO IS
A POLICE OFFICER WHO WAS A KID
WHO GREW UP IN THIS AREA AND
HE&apos;S NOW POLICE CHIEF IN A
SMALL COMMUNITY.
BUT WE TALKED ABOUT HIS EFFORTS
OR HIS MOVE TO GO INTO LAW
ENFORCEMENT AND ALL OF THAT.
BUT WE I DON&apos;T THINK WE HAD A A
DEFINITE ABOUT TALKING ABOUT
THE PATH HERE LOCALLY THAT WE
COULD HAVE TO HAVE BETTER
REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE WHO
GREW UP IN THIS COMMUNITY TO BE
A POLICE OFFICER.
I THINK THAT&apos;S DEFINITELY A
DISCUSSION WE SHOULD HAVE IN
THE FUTURE.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT, BECAUSE THEY GAVE US
SOME SPECIFIC REASONS ABOUT WHY
THEY DID NOT WANT TO BECOME THE
POLICE AND SO I THINK IT&apos;S
IMPORTANT FOR US TO HEAR THAT
TOO BECAUSE IT HELPS TO
UNDERSTAND THE CHALLENGES WITH
HOW THAT MIGHT BE OVERCOME IN
THE FUTURE.
SO I THINK IT IS IMPORTANT TO
HEAR THAT AS WELL AS WE THINK
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, WHAT THAT
MEANS FOR POLICING IN THE
FUTURE.
&gt;&gt; BUT GREAT QUESTION IS THERE
ANYTHING I CAN REPORT OUT ON
SOME WORK WITH THE WASHTENAW
EQUITY PARTNERS?
I BELONG TO A GROUP OF JUDGES
AND SOCIAL WORKERS AND
RESEARCHERS AND TEACHERS AND
COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH WORKERS
THAT IS WORKING ON WHAT&apos;S
CALLED FRONT END PREVENTION.
AND SO WE HAVE MET A COUPLE
OF TIMES TO TALK ABOUT
SPECIFICALLY ALL OF WASHTENAW
COUNTY AND HOW TO PREVENT WHAT
WE THINK OF AS A PIPELINE FROM
ENCOUNTERING LAW ENFORCEMENT
AND BEING INDUCTED INTO
INDUCTED IS NOT A GOOD WORD
VACUUMED MAYBE INTO THE
CRIMINAL LEGAL SYSTEM AND HOW
TO PREVENT SOME OF THAT.
SO I JUST WANT TO KIND
OF REPORT I&apos;VE PARTICIPATED IN
A COUPLE OF THOSE MEETINGS AND
WE ARE RIGHT NOW STRATEGIZING
ABOUT SORT OF WHICH RESEARCH
QUESTIONS TO DEVELOP TO STUDY
WHAT WE MIGHT DO TO PREVENT TO
DO MORE PREVENTION OF OF YOUNG
PEOPLE IN PARTICULAR BEING KIND
OF SWEPT UP INTO THIS SYSTEM.
IT&apos;S A PARTNERSHIP THAT&apos;S FOUND
THAT IT&apos;S FUNDED BY THE VERY
FOUNDATION.
AND SO WE&apos;VE JUST STARTED OUR
WORK ON THAT.
IS THERE ANYBODY ELSE WHO WANTS
TO REPORT OUT ON MEETINGS OR
OTHER EFFORTS THAT THEY&apos;VE DONE
RECENTLY?
&gt;&gt; WE WANT TO TALK ABOUT WHAT
YOU DID TODAY.
I ATTENDED TO THAT MIKE.
WE&apos;RE HERE.
IT&apos;S ALL OUTSIDE OF THE THANK
YOU.
&gt;&gt; I ATTENDED THE A DAY
OF EMPATHY UP AT THE MICHIGAN
STATE CAPITAL THAT WAS PUT ON
BY THE ORGANIZATION SAFE AND
JUST AND I WAS TALKING WITH
CHAIR JACKSON ON THE WAY HOME A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE THE THEY
HAD A PANEL OF WOMEN WHO HAD
DONE TIME AT HURON VALLEY AND
BASICALLY THEY TALKED ABOUT THE
CONDITIONS THERE AT THE PRISON
AND THE DEPLORABLE CONDITIONS
THEY TOUCHED ON.
IT WAS LIKE WAS TELLING CHAIR
JACKSON IT WAS VERY TRIGGERING
REALLY TO TALK ABOUT IT SO THEY
DIDN&apos;T GET TOO DEEP INTO IT BUT
ESSENTIALLY, YOU KNOW, IT JUST
BROUGHT UP THE DISCUSSION
BETWEEN TAJIKSTAN AND I ABOUT
REALLY WORKING WITH THE
COMMUNITY TO END THE STIGMA
AROUND FOLKS THAT HAVE BEEN
INCARCERATED AND THOSE THAT ARE
REENTERING INTO BACK INTO THE
COMMUNITY AND YEAH, WE JUST
BASICALLY THERE&apos;S A LOT OF WORK
TO BE DONE.
&gt;&gt; I THINK THAT THE WORD YOU
USED VACUUM I USE ON ONRAMP I
THINK THAT IF WE REALLY CAN
REALLY STAMP OUT THE STIGMA,
THERE&apos;S JUST A LOT OF WORK TO
BE DONE SO THAT THOSE THAT LIVE
IN CERTAIN COMMUNITIES CAN FEEL
MORE COMFORTABLE IN THEIR OWN
SKIN, THAT THEY CAN FEEL SAFE
WHEN THEY ARE OUT AND ABOUT
THAT THEY DON&apos;T HAVE TO WORRY
ABOUT JOGGING THROUGH A
NEIGHBORHOOD OR REALLY JUST
LIVING.
SO YEAH, THAT&apos;S WHAT I ATTENDED
TODAY AND IT WAS VERY
EMPOWERING.
I&apos;M DOING SOME WORK AT MY
ORGANIZATION.
I WORK FOR THE THE CENTER FOR
INDEPENDENT LIVING AND WE ARE
WORKING AND WE&apos;RE IN THE
BEGINNING PHASES OF WORKING ON
A REENTRY PROGRAM AND WE&apos;RE
PARTNERING WITH THE WASHTENAW
COUNTY SHERIFF&apos;S OFFICE RIGHT
AWAY CATHOLIC SOCIAL SERVICES.
&gt;&gt; WE JUST HAD OUR MEETING LAST
WEEK SO A LOT OF WORK TO BE
DONE BUT YEAH, WE&apos;VE WE&apos;VE GOT
A LOT OF WE&apos;VE GOT A LONG WAY
TO GO WHEN IT COMES TO ENDING
THE STIGMA AROUND FOLKS THAT
STRUGGLE TO BASICALLY LIVE IN
THEIR OWN SKIN.
&gt;&gt; SO YEAH AND WE KNOW WE DON&apos;T
DO PRISON OVERSIGHT HERE BUT I
THINK IT ILLUSTRATES THE
IMPORTANCE OF TRYING TO PREVENT
PEOPLE FROM GETTING INTO THE
SYSTEM IN THE FIRST PLACE
BECAUSE THERE ARE SO MANY
CHALLENGES ONCE YOU&apos;RE IN IT
AND THERE ARE STUDIES THAT TALK
ABOUT HOW COSTLY IT IS IN TERMS
OF THE LOSS OF EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES IF YOU HAVE A
CRIMINAL RECORD, THE CHALLENGES
IN FINDING HOUSING, IF YOU HAVE
A CRIMINAL RECORD AND EVEN
THOUGH YOU KNOW AND I WORK SO
HARD TO SORT OF BAN THE BOX AND
NOT HAVE PEOPLE HAVE TO CHECK
IF THEY WERE FORMERLY
INCARCERATED WHEN THEY&apos;RE
SEEKING A RENTAL UNIT THERE ARE
OTHER WAYS AND OTHER TELLS, IF
YOU WILL FOR FOR PEOPLE WHO
HAVE BEEN IN THAT SYSTEM AND
JUST HOW FOR MANY PEOPLE THOSE
LABELS FOLLOW YOU FOR DECADES
IF NOT FOR THE REST OF YOUR
LIFE AND HOW CHALLENGING THAT
IS AND SO CERTAINLY WE HAVE
WORK TO DO WITH WHAT HAPPENS TO
PEOPLE IN REENTRY AND MAKING
SURE THAT PEOPLE CAN REENTER
THE SYSTEM AND BUT IT ALSO TO
ME REALLY EMPHASIZES THE NEED
TO KEEP PEOPLE OUT OF THE
SYSTEM IN THE FIRST PLACE.
&gt;&gt; SO I THINK ABOUT THAT FRONT
END PREVENTION WORK ALL THE
TIME AND THINK ABOUT, YOU KNOW,
WHOM WE ARREST AND FOR WHAT AND
IN REGARDS TO EMPLOYMENT, I&apos;VE
SAID OFTEN THAT, YOU KNOW, I
WONDER WHO REALLY THOUGHT THAT
KEEPING FOLKS FROM HAVING SOUND
SUSTAINABLE EMPLOYMENT THAT
THAT CREATED PUBLIC SAFETY IT
DOESN&apos;T SO WE&apos;VE GOT YOU KNOW,
WE DO HAVE BANDBOX AND WE&apos;VE
GOT THE FELON FRIENDLY LIST BUT
THERE&apos;S A LONG WAY TO GO WITH
THAT LIST IN PARTICULAR AND I
THINK AGAIN IT&apos;S JUST ABOUT
REALLY BEING ABLE TO GET PEOPLE
TO HEAR US AND TALK WITH
EMPLOYERS, SMALL BUSINESS
OWNERS AND JUST DISTRESSING THE
IMPORTANCE THAT YEAH, THESE
FOLKS NEED A CHANCE AND THEY
NEED EMPLOYMENT.
THEY NEED THEY NEED TO BE
MAKING A LIVING WAGE AND IF IT
LIKE I SAID, IT DOES NOT CREATE
PUBLIC SAFETY TO KEEP FOLKS
FROM FROM EMPLOYMENT.
&gt;&gt; SO THANK YOU.
ANY OTHER REPORTS OUT
COMMUNICATIONS ARE THERE ANY
PUBLIC COMMENT CALLERS KNOW
THAT PRESENTLY.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
IS THERE A MOTION TO ADJOURN?
&gt;&gt; JUDGES ARE BEING ASKED TO
LOOK IS THAT COMMISSIONER
CARTER I&apos;M SORRY.
&gt;&gt; EXCUSE ME.
IT&apos;S ME.
SO I GO OK, LISTEN, I HAVE I
HAVE LISTENED I WAS VERY HAPPY
TO HEAR FROM THE REPRESENTATIVE
FROM THE STATE POLICE AS WELL
AS THE ACTION ON THE TRAFFIC
RESOLUTION AND I WAS JUST HAPPY
TO ATTEND.
THEY THANK YOU THANK YOU FOR
BEING THERE IN SPIRIT WITH US.
MOTION TO ADJOURN SECOND SECOND
ALL IN FAVOR OF ADJOURNMENT.
I OPPOSED WE ARE ADJOURNED